Hobbit	'message'
Sandyman	'The Scouring of the Shire'
Hobbit	'the Big Folk'
Michel Delving	's time that was very ancient history. The last battle, before this story opens, and indeed the only one that had ever been fought within the borders of the Shire, was beyond living memory: the Battle of Greenfields, S.R. 1147, in which Bandobras Took routed an invasion of Orcs. Even the weathers had grown milder, and the wolves that had once come ravening out of the North in bitter white winters were now only a grandfather'
Brandybuck	'art'
Hobbit	' he says, '
Butterbur	'How Old Toby came by the plant is not recorded, for to his dying day he would not tell. He knew much about herbs, but he was no traveller. It is said that in his youth he went often to Bree, though he certainly never went further from the Shire than that. It is thus quite possible that he learned of this plant in Bree, where now, at any rate, it grows well on the south slopes of the hill. The Bree-hobbits claim to have been the first actual smokers of the pipe-weed. They claim, of course, to have done everything before the people of the Shire, whom they refer to as "
Wilderland	's door the great Wizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with him: none other, indeed, than Thorin Oakenshield, descendant of kings, and his twelve companions in exile. With them he set out, to his own lasting astonishment, on a morning of April, it being then the year 1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest of great treasure, the dwarf-hoards of the Kings under the Mountain, beneath Erebor in Dale, far off in the East. The quest was successful, and the Dragon that guarded the hoard was destroyed. Yet, though before all was won the Battle of Five Armies was fought, and Thorin was slain, and many deeds of renown were done, the matter would scarcely have concerned later history, or earned more than a note in the long annals of the Third Age, but for an '
Bilbo	'question'
Bilbo	's back, though he did not yet understand what had happened. But Gollum had at last leaped to a guess, too late. What has it got in its pocketses? he cried. The light in his eyes was like a green flame as he sped back to murder the hobbit and recover his '
Bilbo	's first story, as soon as he heard it, and he continued to be very curious about the ring. Eventually he got the true tale out of Bilbo after much questioning, which for a while strained their friendship; but the wizard seemed to think the truth important. Though he did not say so to Bilbo, he also thought it important, and disturbing, to find that the good hobbit had not told the truth from the first: quite contrary to his habit. The idea of a '
Thain	's Writer, finished this work in IV 172. It is an exact copy in all details of the Thain'
Bilbo	's Book was thus the first copy made of the Red Book and contained much that was later omitted or lost. In Minas Tirith it received much annotation, and many corrections, especially of names, words, and quotations in the Elvish languages; and there was added to it an abbreviated version of those parts of The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen which lie outside the account of the War. The full tale is stated to have been written by Barahir, grandson of the Steward Faramir, some time after the passing of the King. But the chief importance of Findegil'
Bilbo	"present"
Elf	'Speed now, fair guests!'
Sun	'Splendid!'
Tom	'down under Hill'
Merry	'Come on! Follow me!'
Frodo	'Sam! Sam! Merry! Pippin!'
Frodo	'No!'
Frodo	's feet; and there was Tom'
Tom	'Come, friend Frodo!'
Merry	'What in the name of wonder?'
Sam	'Dressed up like this, sir?'
Tom	'You won'
Pippin	'What do you mean?'
Tom	'You'
Frodo	'Where does that other old animal, that Fatty Lumpkin, come from?'
Tom	'He'
Goldberry	've got things to do,'
Wight	's provisions, meant for their supper, with additions that Tom had brought with him. It was not a large meal (considering hobbits and the circumstances), but they felt much better for it. While they were eating Tom went up to the mound, and looked through the treasures. Most of these he made into a pile that glistened and sparkled on the grass. He bade them lie there '
Carn Dûm	'Old knives are long enough as swords for hobbit-people,'
Tom	'Few now remember them,'
Frodo	'Well, here we are again at last!'
Pippin	'Do you think,'
Tom Bom	'No, I hope not tonight,'
Barliman Butterbur	'Tom will give you good advice, till this day is over (after that your own luck must go with you and guide you): four miles along the Road you'
Bree	' said Sam. '
Underhill	' said Frodo; '
Frodo	'We are making for the inn here,'
Shire	'Hobbits! Four hobbits! And what'
Shire	'We don'
Frodo	'Our names and our business are our own, and this does not seem a good place to discuss them,'
Brandybuck	'We are hobbits from Buckland, and we have a fancy to travel and to stay at the inn here,'
Harry	'All right, all right!'
Tom Bom	'What'
Frodo	'Can we-'
Barliman Butterbur	'That'
Underhill	'Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck,'
Butterbur	'There now!'
Nob	'Hi! Nob!'
Bob	'Where'
Butterbur	'Well, now, what was I going to say?'
Nob	'Here is a nice little parlour!'
Shire	'I don'
Shire	's steady going, not hindered by unnecessary talk) that Frodo, Pippin, and Sam decided to join the company. Merry said it would be too stuffy. '
Pippin	'All right!'
Shire	'Old Barliman here'
Butterbur	'Who is that?'
Butterbur	'Him?'
Underhill	'I am called Strider,'
Frodo	'He did,'
Shire	'Well, Master Underhill,'
Strider	'You had better do something quick!'
Shire	'a few suitable words'
Bob	'Where'
Strider	'Well?'
Frodo	'I don'
Baggins	'Oh yes, you do,'
Frodo	'What about?'
Frodo	'A matter of some importance - to us both,'
Frodo	'Very well,'
Underhill	's some mistake somewhere,'
Butterbur	'And I say there'
Frodo	'Of course there'
Frodo	'I am very sorry to have caused any trouble,'
Butterbur	'I shan'
Butterbur	'Certainly!'
Pippin	'Hallo!'
Frodo	'You said I might hear something to my advantage, I believe,'
Strider	'Several things,'
Frodo	'What do you mean?'
Frodo	'And what will that be, pray?'
Frodo	'No more than you can afford,'
Frodo	'Oh, indeed!'
Strider	'Excellent!'
Frodo	'Go on then!'
Underhill	'Too much; too many dark things,'
Bree	'I don'
Strider	'Well answered!'
Black	'Now, don'
Strider	'It would have been better,'
Frodo	'Do you think he---'
Butterbur	'No, I don'
Frodo	'It was sheer accident!'
Strider	'I wonder,'
Frodo	'Hardly more than it was already,'
Bill	'You must not count on that!'
Frodo	'What will Ferny sell, and what has my accident got to do with him?'
Shire	'News of you, of course,'
Tom	'There!'
Strider	'With your leave, Mr. Frodo, I'
Sam	'No,'
Strider	'The lesson in caution has been well learned,'
Nob	'I'
Baggins	'It'
Frodo	'And what has that got to do with me?'
Underhill	'Ah! you know best,'
Frodo	'Indeed! Let'
Butterbur	'A stout little fellow with red cheeks,'
Frodo	'He said it? And who was he?'
Butterbur	'Well, what have you done?'
Shire	'Where was I?'
Butterbur	'It'
Frodo	'A letter for me from Gandalf!'
Baggins	'Ah!'
Frodo	'It is,'
Shire	'You'
Underhill	'Leaving the letter aside, I promised Gandalf no less. Barley, he says to me, this friend of mine from the Shire, he may be coming out this way before long, him and another. He'
Frodo	'What do you mean?'
Baggins	'These black men,'
Strider	'He did!'
Frodo	'He'
Butterbur	'Well, you know your own business, maybe,'
Strider	'Then who would you take up with?'
Underhill	'Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn'
Black	'I'
Strider	'They come from Mordor,'
Butterbur	'Save us!'
Underhill	'Against the Shadow in the East,'
Baggins	'I'
Frodo	'Well, we can only hope the Riders won'
Butterbur	'I hope not, indeed,'
Frodo	'In any case we must be called at dawn,'
Underhill	'Right! I'
Merry	'I don'
Butterbur	'Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might be on a holiday!'
Gandalf	'Well?'
Gandalf	'Really old Butterbur has made a mess of things!'
Strider	'He has been doing that for many years,'
Gandalf	's second postscript. '
Strider	'Would it? Would any of you have believed me till now?'
Pippin	'They are - at first sight at any rate,'
Gandalf	'How do we know you are the Strider that Gandalf speaks about?'
Gamgee	'That you are a stout fellow,'
Strider	'I see,'
Gandalf	'Did the verses apply to you then?'
Sam	'I did not know,'
Weathertop	'Well,'
Sam	'Weathertop?'
Frodo	'When did you last see Gandalf?'
Sam Ford	'I do not know,'
Frodo	'Do you think the Black Riders have anything to do with it - with Gandalf'
Shire	'I do not know of anything else that could have hindered him, except the Enemy himself,'
Merry	'I am sorry,'
Frodo	'Black Riders!'
Merry	'Which way did it go?'
Merry	'It seemed to make off up the Road, eastward,'
Merry	'I don'
Brandybuck	'I found him, sir,'
Merry	'I am afraid that'
Bill	'I do,'
Merry	'What will happen?'
Frodo	'We seem to have enemies all round,'
Underhill	'Well Masters,'
Strider	'We shall see,'
Nob	'Good night to you,'
Merry	'Jumped over the Moon!'
Strider	'I hope so,'
Buckland	'No, no, no!'
Strider	'Dark times,'
Merry	'bite'
Frodo	'Ponies would not help us to escape horsemen,'
Pippin	'As much as we must,'
Sam	'I can carry enough for two,'
Butterbur	'Can'
Bob	'I doubt it,'
Strider	'Yes,'
Merry	'There is one crumb of comfort,'
Bill	' delay. Bob came back with the report that no horse or pony was to be got for love or money in the neighbourhood - except one: Bill Ferny had one that he might possibly sell. '
Frodo	'Bill Ferny?'
Strider	'I wonder,'
Merry	's price was twelve silver pennies; and that was indeed at least three times the pony'
Butterbur	's ponies had escaped altogether, and eventually (having a good deal of sense) they made their way to the Downs in search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they came under the care of Tom Bombadil for a while, and were well-off. But when news of the events at Bree came to Tom'
Butterbur	'If you pick up with a horse-thief, and bring him to my house,'
Combe	'clock before they at last got off. By that time the whole of Bree was buzzing with excitement. Frodo'
Frodo	'I hope we shall meet again some day, when things are merry once more,'
Sammie	'Morning, Longshanks!'
Bill	'And you. Ferny,'
Strider	'This is where we leave the open and take to cover,'
Pippin	'Not a "
Strider	'Ah, but you had not got me with you then,'
Archet	'Bill Ferny will have watched where we left the Road, for certain,'
Pippin	'I am being eaten alive!'
Sam	'What do they live on when they can'
Strider	'I do not know,'
Strider	'That is Weathertop,'
Frodo	'What do you mean?'
Frodo	'What do you advise us to do?'
Weathertop	'I think,'
Frodo	'Very odd,'
Strider	'Do not speak of such things!'
Merry	'I wonder who made this path, and what for,'
Amon Sûl	'No. There is no barrow on Weathertop, nor on any of these hills,'
Merry	'Who was Gil-galad?'
Merry	'Don'
Bilbo	'That'
Gil-galad	'He did not make it up,'
Sam	'There was a lot more,'
Pippin	'Going to Mordor!'
Strider	'Do not speak that name so loudly!'
Merry	'Well, here we are!'
Bree	'I wonder,'
Gandalf	'The stroke on the left might be a G-rune with thin branches,'
Merry	'What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?'
Gandalf	'I should say,'
Frodo	'I wish we could feel sure that he made the marks, whatever they may mean,'
Strider	'Perhaps,'
Merry	'How far is Rivendell?'
Bruinen	'I don'
Frodo	'A fortnight!'
Strider	'It may,'
Strider	'I do not know, but I fear the worst,'
Strider	'Yes,'
Pippin	'I wonder if old Gandalf has been here,'
Pippin	'It is just as I feared,'
Strider	'Hadn'
Sam	'Yes, we certainly must decide what to do at once,'
Merry	'Can the Riders see?'
Gandalf	'I was too careless on the hill-top,'
Frodo	'Is there no escape then?'
Sauron	'There is still hope,'
Sam	'Maybe,'
Frodo	'I don'
Elrond	'There is food in the wild,'
Merry	'Tell us of Gil-galad,'
Merry	'I do indeed,'
Gil-galad	'I know only the little that Gandalf has told me,'
Elrond	'No!'
Sam	'Then tell us some other tale of the old days,'
Elrond	'I will tell you the tale of Tinúviel,'
Lúthien Tinúviel	' he said, '
Merry	'Look!'
Frodo	'Did you see anything?'
Merry	'I saw something,'
Strider	'Keep close to the fire, with your faces outward!'
Pippin	'Hush!'
Sam	'What has happened? Where is the pale king?'
Sam	'Keep the fire going well, and keep Frodo warm!'
Frodo	'Look!'
Strider	'And more deadly to Frodo was this!'
Gandalf	'I think now,'
Weathertop	's march was over Frodo'
Grey	"I am afraid we must go back to the Road here for a while,'
Merry	'What is that other river we can see far away there?'
Bruinen	'That is Loudwater, the Bruinen of Rivendell,'
Frodo	's account of his journey and the threatening towers on the hills north of the Road, in the country near the Troll'
Angmar	'No!'
Peregrin	'Where did you learn such tales, if all the land is empty and forgetful?'
Frodo	'The heirs of Elendil do not forget all things past,'
Bruinen	'We have come too far to the north,'
Merry	'We cannot go any further,'
Strider	'We shall see,'
Sam	'What is the matter with my master?'
Sam	'Frodo has been touched by the weapons of the Enemy,'
Pippin	'Surely this is a troll-hole, if ever there was one!'
Strider	'There is no need, I think,'
Pippin	'There are trolls!'
Sam	'We will come and look at them,'
Gandalf	'Well!'
Bilbo	'I had no idea we were anywhere near the place!'
Strider	'You are forgetting not only your family history, but all you ever knew about trolls,'
Merry	'Won'
Sam	'Not since Weathertop,'
Merry	'Come on, Sam!'
Sam	'I don'
Merry	'Well, that'
Gamgee	'It'
Sam	'I hope not,'
Merry	'There!'
Bilbo	'None at all,'
Frodo	'That does not sound like a Black Rider'
Strider	'This is Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of Elrond,'
Elf	'Hail, and well met at last!'
Frodo	'Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?'
Baranduin	'No. He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,'
Sam	'My master is sick and wounded,'
Elrond	'There are evil things written on this hilt,'
Glorfindel	'You shall ride my horse,'
Frodo	'No, he will not!'
Frodo	'I doubt very much,'
Merry	's white horse. The pony was laden instead with a great part of the others'
Glorfindel	'Drink this!'
Glorfindel	'Our peril will be greatest just ere we reach the river,'
Glorfindel	'Ride forward! Ride!'
Glorfindel	'Ride on! Ride on!'
Bombadil	'Go back!'
Frodo	'By Elbereth and Lúthien the Fair,'
Elrond	`Where am I, and what is the time?'
Frodo	`Gandalf!'
Weathertop	`Yes,'
Sam	'Where'
Sam	'Yes, they are all safe and sound,'
Frodo	`What happened at the Ford?'
Weathertop	'Yes, it would. You were beginning to fade,'
Frodo	'You seem to know a great deal already,'
Gandalf	'You have talked long in your sleep, Frodo,'
Frodo	'We should never have done it without Strider,'
Gandalf	'I was delayed,'
Frodo	`But talking would stop me thinking and wondering, which are quite as tiring,'
Gandalf	'You will soon hear all you wish to know,'
Frodo	'You?'
Black	'Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,'
Glorfindel	'Yes,'
Bill	'I am glad,'
Gandalf	`You don'
Ranger	'Do you really mean that Strider is one of the people of the old Kings?'
Gandalf	'Only a Ranger!'
Frodo	'I suppose not,'
Gandalf	'You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,'
Frodo	'I don'
Elrond	`Good!'
Frodo	'Days?'
Hobbit	's hands. `
Frodo	`What would they have done to me?'
Frodo	'Thank goodness I did not realize the horrible danger!'
Gandalf	'Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,'
Frodo	`I know,'
Frodo	'I haven'
Elrond	`Still that must be expected,'
Elrond	`You look splendid,'
Frodo	'And is that the end of the Black Riders?'
Elrond	'No,'
Frodo	`Who made the flood?'
Gandalf	'Elrond commanded it,'
Frodo	`Yes, it all comes back to me now,'
Elrond	'Splendid!'
Bilbo	`Well, there are many reasons why they should,'
Frodo	`Dear Bilbo!'
Frodo	`Hullo, Sam!'
Sam	`It'
Frodo	'I am ready,'
Sam	`I can take you to them, sir,'
Frodo	'I know what you have been doing, Sam,'
Pippin	`Hurray!'
Gandalf	'Hush!'
Pippin	`Gandalf has been saying many cheerful things like that,'
Frodo	`I feel like singing myself,'
Pippin	`That will soon be cured,'
Merry	`More than meal! A feast!'
Elrohir	's kin, in Lórien beyond the mountains, and was but lately returned to Rivendell to her father'
Glóin	'Welcome and well met!'
Thorin	'Frodo Baggins at your service and your family'
Bilbo	`Quite right,'
Frodo	`Thank you very much,'
Glóin	'You have had some very strange adventures, I hear,'
Frodo	'I think we will not speak of it, at least not yet,'
Bard	'lndeed,'
Frodo	'And what of your own people?'
Glóin	`There is much to tell, good and bad,'
Frodo	'And what has become of Balin and Ori and Óin?'
Balin	's face. `
Dale	'We have done well,'
Bilbo	'I will come and see them, if ever I can,'
Frodo	`Yes,'
Frodo	'Awake little master. he said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he beckoned to him. '
Frodo	`Bilbo!'
Bilbo	`Hullo, Frodo my lad!'
Frodo	'Why weren'
Dúnadan	`Why, sitting and thinking. I do a lot of that nowadays, and this is the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!'
Bilbo	`He shall be found,'
Tim	`I got here without much adventure,'
Bilbo	'And Gandalf said: "
Frodo	`Yes, I'
Bilbo	`Well, I should just like to see it for a moment,'
Shire	's face and passed his hand across his eyes. `
Frodo	`Strider!'
Bilbo	`Well, Strider is one that I haven'
Strider	`They call me that in Bree,'
Frodo	`And why do you call him Dúnadan?'
Bilbo	`The Dúnadan,'
Arwen	`Where have you been, my friend? Why weren'
Elrohir	`I know,'
Bilbo	`Well, my dear fellow,'
Elf	`Now we had better have it again,'
Dúnadan	`What!'
Elf	'It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two mortals'
Hobbit	'Nonsense, Lindir,'
Lindir	'Maybe. To sheep other sheep no doubt appear different,'
Bilbo	'I won'
Frodo	`I am not going to try and guess,'
Bilbo	`You needn'
Frodo	'I don'
Bilbo	`It is difficult to keep awake here, until you get used to it;'
Frodo	`Can we?'
Bilbo	`It is a song to Elbereth,'
Sam	`Begging your pardon,'
Bilbo	`And begging yours, Sam Gamgee,'
Bilbo	`Quite right, Sam,'
Bilbo	`Hullo! Good morning!'
Frodo	`I feel ready for anything,'
Gandalf	'You may have a chance later,'
Bilbo	`That is the warning bell for the Council of Elrond,'
Grey	's side: his son Gimli. Beside Glorfindel there were several other counsellors of Elrond'
Elrond	`Here,'
Moria	`It is now many years ago,'
Sauron	"Then about a year ago a messenger came to Dáin, but not from Moria - from Mordor: a horseman in the night, who called Dáin to his gate. The Lord Sauron the Great, so he said, wished for our friendship. Rings he would give for it, such as he gave of old. And he asked urgently concerning hobbits, of what kind they were, and where they dwelt. "
Moria	'At this we were greatly troubled, and we gave no answer. And then his fell voice was lowered, and he would have sweetened it if he could. "
Dáin	' "
Sauron	`You have done well to come,'
Thangorodrim	`I remember well the splendour of their banners,'
Gil-galad	`You remember?'
Gondolin	'So it was indeed,'
Isildur	`So that is what became of the Ring!'
Orodruin	`Alas! yes,'
Isildur	' "
Elrond	'And here in the house of Elrond more shall be made clear to you'
Boromir	`And who are you, and what have you to do with Minas Tirith?'
Isildur	`He is Aragorn son of Arathorn,'
Frodo	`Then it belongs to you, and not to me at all!'
Gandalf	'Bring out the Ring, Frodo!'
Elrond	'Behold Isildur'
Hal	's eyes glinted as he gazed at the golden thing. `
Isildur	'The words were not the doom of Minas Tirith,'
Elendil	`I was not sent to beg any boon, but to seek only the meaning of a riddle,'
Dúnadan	`I made that up myself,'
Harad	`For my part I forgive your doubt,'
Strider	`And yet less thanks have we than you. Travellers scowl at us, and countrymen give us scornful names. "
Isildur	`Isildur'
Elrond	`That shall be told,'
Bilbo	`But not yet, I beg, Master!'
Elrond	`I had not named you,'
Glóin	`Very well,'
Frodo	'Well told, my friend,'
Bilbo	`Not bad,'
Gandalf	`Yes, it made quite a long tale,'
Elrond	`You speak for me also,'
Elrond	`The questions that you ask, Galdor, are bound together,'
Glóin	`Some, Galdor,'
Sauron	` "
Saruman	`There I was at fault,'
Elrond	`We were all at fault,'
Gandalf	`From the first my heart misgave me, against all reason that I knew,'
Isildur	`And I,'
Isildur	`What those marks were he had not said. Who now would know? The maker. And Saruman? But great though his lore may be, it must have a source. What hand save Sauron'
Saruman	' "
Minas Anor	'Some in the North, maybe,'
Isildur	`But in that time also he made this scroll,'
Black	`There is little need to tell of them,'
Bilbo	`Yes, long and weary,'
Elrond	`Never before has any voice dared to utter the words of that tongue in Imladris, Gandalf the Grey,'
Eregion	`And let us hope that none will ever speak it here again,'
Sauron	'He is in prison, but no worse,'
Legolas	`Alas! alas!'
Thranduil	'Escaped?'
Legolas	`Not through lack of watchfulness,'
Glóin	'You were less tender to me,'
Glóin	'Now come!'
Mirkwood	'It was that very night of summer, yet moonless and starless, that Orcs came on us at unawares. We drove them off after some time; they were many and fierce, but they came from over the mountains, and were unused to the woods. When the battle was over, we found that Gollum was gone, and his guards were slain or taken. It then seemed plain to us that the attack had been made for his rescue, and that he knew of it beforehand. How that was contrived we cannot guess; but Gollum is cunning, and the spies of the Enemy are many. The dark things that were driven out in the year of the Dragon'
Sauron	`Well, well, he is gone,'
Elrond	'And now I will answer Galdor'
Shire	` "
Shire	' "
Radagast	` "
Shire	` "
Shire	' "
Radagast	' "
Saruman	' "
Radagast	' "
Orthanc	` "
Gandalf	` "
Saruman	` "
Grey	' "
Shire	' "
Radagast	' "
Radagast	` "
Power	' "
Saruman	' "
Power	`He came and laid his long hand on my arm. "
Sauron	' "
Grey	' "
Frodo	`I saw you!'
Shire	'It was only a dream'
Grey	`Then it was late in coming,'
Radagast	`That was the undoing of Saruman'
Gwaihir	` "
Rohan	` "
Gwaihir	` "
Saruman	` "
Sauron	'Then he must be a noble beast indeed,'
Rohan	`Nor is it now, I will swear,'
Rohan	`The shadow of Mordor lies on distant lands,'
Boromir	`Not this at least.'
Rohan	'True indeed!'
Hobbit	' "
Butterbur	' "
Frodo	`What did you do to him?'
Bree	'Don'
Strider	` "
Butterbur	` "
Bilbo	`This is grievous news concerning Saruman,'
Gandalf	`He would not have come,'
Erestor	`Could we not still send messages to him and obtain his help?'
Gandalf	`No, I should not put it so,'
Erestor	`But within those bounds nothing seems to dismay him,'
Gandalf	`No,'
Bombadil	`But in any case,'
Sauron	`I know little of Iarwain save the name,'
Elrond	`I have not the strength,'
Glorfindel	`Then if the Ring cannot be kept from him for ever by strength'
Elrond	`But Gandalf has revealed to us that we cannot destroy it by any craft that we here possess,'
Saruman	'Then, said Glorfindel, '
Gandalf	`Not safe for ever,'
Sauron	'And that we shall not find on the roads to the Sea,'
Gondor	'Long yet will that march be delayed,'
Galdor	'And yet its vigilance can no longer keep back the Nine,'
Erestor	'Then,'
Elrond	'None here can do so,'
Saruman	'I do not understand all this,'
Sauron	'Alas, no,'
Gandalf	`Nor I,'
Gondor	`So be it,'
Boromir	`May the day not be too long delayed,'
Argonath	`Then be comforted,'
Moria	'Still it might be well for all,'
Thorin	`Balin will find no ring in Moria,'
Elf	'Ah, alas!'
Sauron	`Did you not hear me, Glóin?'
Glóin	`But what then would happen, if the Ruling Ring were destroyed as you counsel?'
Sauron	'We know not for certain,'
Sauron	`Yet all the Elves are willing to endure this chance,'
Elrond	'Thus we return once more to the destroying of the Ring,'
Gandalf	'Despair, or folly?'
Elrond	'At least for a while,'
Bilbo	'Very well, very well, Master Elrond!'
Bilbo	`Of course, my dear Bilbo,'
Shire	`If I understand aright all that I have heard,'
Sam	`But you won'
Elrond	`No indeed!'
Elrond	`It'
Frodo	`Rewards!'
Merry	'I don'
Pippin	`That'
Gandalf	'Then you certainly will not be chosen, Peregrin Took!'
Pippin	`Nothing decided!'
Legolas	"Talking,'
Gwaihir	`You were wrong,'
Bilbo	`Well, anyway,'
Elrond	'Yes,'
Sam	'Ah!'
Bilbo	'That can'
Gandalf	'I am afraid it will,'
Merry	`I thought they were all destroyed in the flood,'
Gandalf	'You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that,'
Elrond	's delight at this announcement that Gandalf left the window-sill, where he had been sitting, and took off his hat and bowed. '
Bilbo	`How long do you think I shall have here?'
Bilbo	`Oh, I don'
Frodo	'Yes, several, and all are dark and unpleasant,'
Bilbo	'Oh, that won'
Frodo	`It will do well, if it ever comes to that,'
Sam	'Ah!'
Gandalf	'Eight out of the Nine are accounted for at least,'
Frodo	'The time has come,'
Sam	'I do,'
Grey	`Then I cannot help you much, not even with counsel,'
Frodo	`Strider!'
Frodo	'Yes,'
Boromir	`I would have begged you to come,'
Boromir	`I am,'
Elrond	'There remain two more to be found,'
Pippin	`But that will leave no place for us!'
Elrond	`That is because you do not understand and cannot imagine what lies ahead,'
Elrond	`Neither does Frodo,'
Peregrin	`You speak gravely,'
Pippin	`Then, Master Elrond, you will have to lock me in prison, or send me home tied in a sack,'
Elrond	`Let it be so then. You shall go,'
Bilbo	'Also there is this!'
Michel Delving	'It'
Frodo	`I should look - well, I don'
Black	`Just what I said myself,'
Bilbo	`Very well, I will take it,'
Bilbo	'Just a plain hobbit you look,'
Frodo	'I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo, for this, and for all our past kindnesses,'
Baggins	'Don'
Gondor	'Loud and clear it sounds in the valleys of the hills,'
Boromir	`Maybe,'
Bill	`That animal can nearly talk,'
Bill	`Bill, my lad,'
Sam	'll warrant); flint and tinder; woollen hose: linen; various small belongings of his master'
Sam	'Rope!'
Gimli	`Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens,'
Elrond	'Maybe,'
Gimli	'Yet sworn word may strengthen quaking heart,'
Elrond	`Or break it,'
Bilbo	'Good . . . good luck!'
Eregion	's side and looked out under his hand. `
Frodo	`Dangerous or not, a real sunrise is mighty welcome,'
Pippin	'But the mountains are ahead of us,'
Elrond	'No,'
Pippin	`Yes I did, sometimes,'
Legolas	`I need no map,'
Silverlode	`It is for the Dimrill Dale that we are making,'
Gimli	`Dark is the water of Kheled-zâram,'
Silverlode	`May you have joy of the sight, my good dwarf l'
Merry	'Yes, and where then?'
Gandalf	'To the end of the journey - in the end,'
Legolas	'That is true,'
Merry	`What is the matter, Strider?'
Gandalf	"Then we must be more careful,'
Sun	's turn that day to take the first watch, but Aragorn joined him. The others fell asleep. Then the silence grew until even Sam felt it. The breathing of the sleepers could be plainly heard. The swish of the pony'
Sam	`What'
Sam	`Lie flat and still!'
Fang	`Regiments of black crows are flying over all the land between the Mountains and the Greyflood,'
Gandalf	`And in that case so is the Redhorn Gate,'
Pippin	`Well if that isn'
Gandalf	`Well, you can go on looking forward,'
Sam	'Too warm, I shouldn'
Gandalf	`Did you see anything pass over?'
Rohan	'I think no good of our course from beginning to end, as you know well, Gandalf,'
Gandalf	'Who knows indeed!'
Gandalf	'We must decide before we go further,'
Gandalf	`From signs that we have seen lately,'
Boromir	'I will add a word of advice, if I may,'
Sam	'And Bill could take a bit more, couldn'
Gandalf	'Very well,'
Hobbit	'I don'
Boromir	'I wonder if this is a contrivance of the Enemy,'
Gimli	'His arm has grown long indeed,'
Gandalf	'His arm has grown long,'
Boromir	`We cannot go further tonight,'
Sauron	`I do call it the wind,'
Sauron	'Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name, said Gimli, `
Merry	'But what can we do?'
Gandalf	`Either stop where we are, or go back,'
Sam	`Shelter!'
Boromir	`This will be the death of the halflings, Gandalf,'
Imladris	`Give them this,'
Gandalf	'What do you say to fire?'
Elf	'You may make a fire, if you can,'
Anduin	`If there are any to see, then I at least am revealed to them,'
Gimli	`If any dawn can pierce these clouds,'
Legolas	`If Gandalf would go before us with a bright flame, he might melt a path for you,'
Gandalf	`If Elves could fly over mountains, they might fetch the Sun to save us,'
Boromir	`Well,'
Sun	'Farewell!'
Legolas	`Well,'
Caradhras	`Ah, it is as I said,'
Boromir	'But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you have Men with you,'
Pippin	`But how are we to get down there, even if you have cut through the drift?'
Peregrin	'Have hope!'
Merry	'Cling to my back! I shall need my arms'
Caradhras	`Enough, enough!'
Gandalf	'That cannot be helped now,'
Frodo	`And then where are we to go? '
Gandalf	'We still have our journey and our errand before us,'
Gandalf	`You are right, Frodo,'
Sam	'Then we must go on, if there is a way,'
Gandalf	`There is a way that we may attempt,'
Merry	`If it is a worse road than the Redhorn Gate, then it must be evil indeed,'
Gandalf	'The road that I speak of leads to the Mines of Moria,'
Rohan	`It is a name of ill omen,'
Isengard	'Things have changed since you came north, Boromir,'
Moria	`We do not know what he expects,'
Moria	`You speak of what you do not know, when you liken Moria to the stronghold of Sauron,'
Gimli	'I will tread the path with you, Gandalf! '
Moria	'Good, Gimli! '
Moria	`I too once passed the Dimrill Gate,'
Pippin	'And I don'
Sam	'Nor me,'
Gandalf	`Of course not! '
Gimli	'I will,'
Moria	'I will,'
Legolas	`I will not go,'
Legolas	'I do not wish to go to Moria,'
Gandalf	`I do not wish to go,'
Gandalf	'Need we wait until morning then? '
Boromir	'How far is Moria? '
Gandalf	`There was a door south-west of Caradhras, some fifteen miles as the crow flies, and maybe twenty as the wolf runs,'
Boromir	'Then let us start as soon as it is light tomorrow, if we can,'
Pippin	`I wish I had taken Elrond'
Pippin	'My heart'
Gandalf	'Listen, Hound of Sauron! '
Gandalf	`Fling fuel on the fire!'
Sam	`What did I tell you, Mr. Pippin? '
Gandalf	`It is as I feared,'
Moria	`We must reach the doors before sunset,'
Gandalf	`I do not know which to hope,'
Sirannon	'Ah! Here it is at last! '
Moria	`Indeed things have changed! '
Gandalf	`There are the Walls of Moria,'
Gimli	`We must find a way round the northern edge,'
Gandalf	`But in any case we cannot take the poor beast into the Mines,'
Sam	`Poor old Bill! '
Bill	`I am sorry,'
Moria	`Well, here we are at last! '
Gimli	'It was not the fault of the Dwarves that the friendship waned,'
Legolas	'I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves,'
Legolas	'I have heard both,'
Bill	'But you can'
Moria	'I am sorry, Sam,'
Sam	'He'
Elrond	'It will be short of murder, I hope,'
Merry	'Well, here we are and all ready,'
Gimli	'Dwarf-doors are not made to be seen when shut,'
Gandalf	'But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to Dwarves,'
Gimli	`There are the emblems of Durin!'
Legolas	`And there is the Tree of the High Elves!'
Gandalf	`And the Star of the House of Fëanor,'
Frodo	'What does the writing say?'
Moria	`The words are in the elven-tongue of the West of Middle-earth in the Elder Days,'
Merry	`What does it mean by speak, friend, and enter?'
Gimli	'That is plain enough,'
Gandalf	'Yes,'
Narvi	'It is,'
Boromir	'But do not you know the word, Gandalf? '
Boromir	'Then what was the use of bringing us to this accursed spot?'
Pippin	`What are you going to do then? '
Gandalf	`Knock on the doors with your head, Peregrin Took,'
Boromir	'Do not let him run away! '
Frodo	'Why did you do that, Boromir? '
Merry	'l wish we could get away! '
Pippin	'Why doesn'
Merry	`I was wrong after all,'
Sam	`Into the gateway! Up the stairs! Quick! '
Bill	's arm, collapsed on a step in the black darkness. `
Frodo	`I felt that something horrible was near from the moment that my foot first touched the water,'
Gandalf	'I do not know,'
Gandalf	'I will,'
Frodo	`Let us sit and rest and have something to eat, here on the landing, since we can'
Dale	`It will not last much longer, I am afraid,'
Frodo	'How long is that going to take us? '
Gandalf	'I cannot say,'
Berúthiel	`Do not be afraid! '
Sam	`Rope! '
Gandalf	' roots. They were more than weary, and yet there seemed no comfort in the thought of halting anywhere. Frodo'
Gandalf	'I have no memory of this place at all! '
Sam	`Poor old Bill! '
Merry	`Steady! Steady! '
Merry	'One of you might have fallen in and still be wondering when you were going to strike the bottom,'
Gimli	'This seems to have been a guardroom, made for the watching of the three passages,'
Pippin	`What'
Gimli	'That was the sound of a hammer, or I have never heard one,'
Peregrin	`Yes,'
Gates	`That is all that I shall venture on for the present,'
Sam	`There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at one time '
Dwarrowdelf	`These are not holes,'
Moria	`I like that! '
Moria	`Piles of jewels? '
Sam	`Then what do the dwarves want to come back for? '
Moria	'For mithril,'
Moria	`What? '
Shire	'Yes,'
Legolas	`I must have nearly fallen asleep on guard,'
Moria	`Good morning! '
Moria	'I shall be glad,'
Moria	`We are tired, but we shall rest better when we are outside,'
Boromir	`No indeed! '
Gates	'Maybe,'
Gandalf	`It looks like a tomb,'
Moria	'These are Daeron'
Frodo	'He is dead then,'
Dale	'It seems to be a record of the fortunes of Balin'
Gimli	'The Chamber of Records,'
Moria	`Well, I can read no more for a long way,'
Gimli	'That would be Ori'
Moria	`I fear he had ill tidings to record in a fair hand,'
Lóni	`It is grim reading,'
Gimli	`We cannot get out,'
Moria	`They seem to have made a last stand by both doors,'
Boromir	'Which way shall we go? '
Gates	'Back to the hall,'
Legolas	`They are coming! '
Gimli	'We cannot get out,'
Gandalf	`Trapped! '
Gandalf	`No! '
Gandalf	`Wait a moment! Do not close it yet! '
Boromir	'And no hope at all, if they come at the other door as well,'
Andúril	'There is no sound outside here yet,'
Black	`The Shire! '
Drogo	`One for the Shire! '
Gandalf	`Now is the time! '
Andúril	's sword and bore him backwards, throwing him to the ground. Diving under Aragorn'
Gandalf	'Now! '
Frodo	'I am all right,'
Gandalf	'Not yet! '
Gandalf	`Do as I say! '
Gimli	`Well, well! That'
Gates	`It is getting hot! '
Gandalf	'I do not know,'
Frodo	`What about me? '
Bree	`Well,'
Frodo	'Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad to say,'
Gandalf	'You take after Bilbo,'
Gandalf	`Ghâsh!'
Moria	`There is some new devilry here,'
Gandalf	'If we had come by the main road down from the upper halls, we should have been trapped here,'
Gandalf	`Now for the last race! '
Gandalf	`Look ahead! '
Merry	'Lead the way, Gimli! '
Legolas	'Ai! ai! '
Gandalf	'A Balrog,'
Gandalf	'Over the bridge!'
Elendil	'He cannot stand alone! '
Boromir	`Gondor! '
Moria	'Alas! I Fear we cannot stay here longer,'
Gimli	`Or Caradhras less cruel,'
Gimli	`There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled-zâram! '
Gimli	'That is Durin'
Gates	`Be swift then! '
Sam	'Come with me, Frodo! '
Gimli	'O Kheled-zâram fair and wonderful! '
Pippin	`What did you see? '
Gimli	'Here is the spring from which the Silverlode rises.'
Silverlode	'Soon it becomes a swift river, and it gathers water from many other mountain-streams,'
Legolas	`There lie the woods of Lothlórien! '
Moria	'I am sorry, Frodo! '
Gimli	'Good luck, Sam! '
Frodo	'I am all right,'
Frodo	`No! '
Shire	`Look, my friends!'
Gandalf	`And all the arrows of all the hunters in the world would be in vain,'
Merry	`I have often wondered what you and Bilbo were doing, so close in his little room,'
Frodo	's right side and breast. Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one point the rings had been driven through it into the flesh. Frodo'
Moria	'Not a sound but the wind,'
Moria	`I don'
Legolas	`Lothlórien! '
Gates	'Lothlórien! '
Gimli	`If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world,'
Legolas	'It is long since any of my own folk journeyed hither back to the land whence we wandered in ages long ago,'
Moria	`A plain road, though it led through a hedge of swords,'
Boromir	`Then lead on! '
Nimrodel	`Here is Nimrodel! '
Westron	`Do you hear the voice of Nimrodel? '
Lothlórien	'I cannot sing any more,'
Gimli	`But the Dwarves did not make the evil,'
Silverlode	`I said not so; yet evil came,'
Dale	`And even in these latter days dwelling in the trees might be thought safer than sitting on the ground,'
Legolas	`I will climb up,'
Pippin	`Whatever it may be,'
Legolas	'Then dig a hole in the ground,'
Legolas	`Daro!'
Merry	`Who are they, and what do they say? '
Sam	`They'
Nimrodel	`Yes, they are Elves,'
Frodo	's face, and Sam'
Rúmil	`Welcome!'
Legolas	`Eight,'
Haldir	`The name of Aragorn son of Arathorn is known in Lórien,'
Legolas	`The eighth is a dwarf,'
Haldir	`A dwarf! '
Elrond	`But he is from the Lonely Mountain, one of Dáin'
Legolas	'Very good,'
Moria	`But now we must debate no longer. Your folk must not remain on the ground. We have been keeping watch on the rivers, ever since we saw a great troop of Orcs going north toward Moria, along the skirts of the mountains, many days ago. Wolves are howling on the wood'
Merry	`There!'
Haldir	`You had no need of your burdens,'
Sam	`Once I do get to sleep,'
Frodo	`What is it? '
Elf	`Yrch!'
Elf	'Orcs! '
Legolas	`Farewell, sweet Nimrodel! '
Elf	`There is one of my people yonder across the stream,'
Haldir	`Celebrant is already a strong stream here, as you see,'
Legolas	`I can walk this path,'
Haldir	`No!'
Silverlode	`Now, friends,'
Legolas	`The agreement was made without my consent,'
Haldir	'I do not doubt you,'
Haldir	`You cannot go back,'
Legolas	'A plague on Dwarves and their stiff necks! '
Legolas	'Come!'
Legolas	`I am an Elf and a kinsman here,'
Haldir	`Now let us cry: "
Gimli	`I shall claim full amends for every fall and stubbed toe, if you do not lead us well,'
Haldir	'You will have no claim,'
Legolas	`Alas for the folly of these days! '
Lothlórien	`Folly it may seem,'
Rohan	`The rivers long defended us, but they are a sure guard no more for the Shadow has crept northward all about us. Some speak of departing, yet for that it already seems too late. The mountains to the west are growing evil; to the east the lands are waste, and full of Sauron'
Merry	`You ought at least to guess, since you have seen us,'
Haldir	`Happy folk are Hobbits to dwell near the shores of the sea! '
Merry	`I cannot,'
Haldir	`Not even to see fair Lothlórien? '
Haldir	`Also,'
Nai	's eyes. '
Haldir	'Behold! You are come to Cerin Amroth,'
Cerin Amroth	`You feel the power of the Lady of the Galadhrim,'
Haldir	`There lies the fastness of Southern Mirkwood,'
Cerin Amroth	`Here is the heart of Elvendom on earth,'
Celeborn	`Welcome to Caras Galadhon! '
Haldir	'Here dwell Celeborn and Galadriel,'
Legolas	`I will go first,'
Celeborn	`Sit now beside my chair, Frodo of the Shire! '
Caras Galadhon	`Welcome Gimli son of Glóin! It is long indeed since we saw one of Durin'
Elrond	'Here there are eight,'
Grey	`Nay, there was no change of counsel,'
Moria	'Alas! '
Celeborn	`These are evil tidings,'
Legolas	'We have not spoken to Haldir of our deeds or our purpose,'
Moria	`Yet our grief is great and our loss cannot be mended,'
Celeborn	'Tell us now the full tale! '
Legolas	'It was a Balrog of Morgoth,'
Gimli	`Indeed I saw upon the bridge that which haunts our darkest dreams l saw Durin'
Moria	'Alas! '
Celeborn	`He would be rash indeed that said that thing,'
Gimli	'Dark is the water of Kheled-zâram, and cold are the springs of Kibil-nâla, and fair were the many-pillared halls of Khazad-dûm in Elder Days before the fall of mighty kings beneath the stone.'
Gimli	`I did not know that your plight was so evil,'
Gondolin	'Your quest is known to us,'
Celeborn	`Go now! '
Pippin	`What did you blush for, Sam? '
Shire	`I never thought no such thing,'
Merry	`That'
Gimli	`And it seemed to me, too,'
Boromir	'To me it seemed exceedingly strange,'
Frodo	`Yes,'
Boromir	`Well, have a care! '
Bilbo	`Why, you'
Frodo	'No, I am afraid not,'
Sam	'Well, Mr. Frodo, if you do have another go, I hope you'
Bilbo	`No, I'
Hobbit	'I have indeed! '
Frodo	'You can see and feel it everywhere,'
Elf	'Well,'
Gandalf	'I wouldn'
Sam	`You'
Gandalf	'It'
Sam	'I am afraid that'
Frodo	'What shall we look for, and what shall we see? '
Elf	`And you? '
Sam	'I did,'
Frodo	`And I'
Sam	`There'
Sandyman	`Hi!'
Merry	'There'
Shire	'You cannot go home alone,'
Frodo	`I wish I had never come here, and I don'
Elf	`Do you now wish to look, Frodo? '
Frodo	`Do you advise me to look? '
Frodo	'No,'
Saruman	`I will look,'
Lady Galadriel	`Do not touch the water!'
Lothlórien	`I know what it was that you last saw,'
Nenya	`Yes,'
Sauron	`That what should be shall be,'
Frodo	'You are wise and fearless and fair, Lady Galadriel,'
Sauron	`Wise the Lady Galadriel may be,'
Galadriel	'I pass the test,'
Gandalf	`I would ask one thing before we go,'
Sam	`You have not tried,'
Lórien	`Now is the time,'
Galadriel	`They all resolved to go forward,'
Boromir	`As for me,'
Celeborn	`That is true,'
Lothlórien	`We have not decided our course,'
Celeborn	`Maybe not,'
Boromir	`If my advice is heeded, it will be the western shore, and the way to Minas Tirith,'
Legolas	`I see that you do not yet know what to do,'
Merry	`And one Hobbit! '
Celeborn	`That is well,'
Celeborn	`All shall be prepared for you and await you at the haven before noon tomorrow,'
Galadriel	'Good night, my friends! '
Boromir	`I shall go to Minas Tirith, alone if need be, for it is my duty,'
Merry	's glance, and he looked hard at him. Plainly Boromir'
Beorn	`Indeed it is,'
Pippin	`Are these magic cloaks? '
Lórien	`I do not know what you mean by that,'
Dale	'I have returned from the Northern Fences,'
Sam	`What are these? '
Elf	`Ropes indeed! '
Sam	'You don'
Elf	`They are made of hithlain,'
Haldir	`Come! '
Celeborn	`Though you have been our guests,'
Cirith Gorgor	`As you go down the water,'
Rohan	'Indeed we have heard of Fangorn in Minas Tirith,'
Celeborn	`Then I need say no more,'
Lothlórien	'We have drunk the cup of parting,'
Andúril	`Here is the gift of Celeborn and Galadriel to the leader of your Company,'
Elf	`Yet maybe this will lighten your heart,'
Arwen	`For the gifts that you have given me I thank you,'
Lórien	`For you little gardener and lover of trees,'
Gimli	`And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves? '
Gimli	`None, Lady,'
Glóin	`Hear all ye Elves! '
Gimli	`There is nothing, Lady Galadriel,'
Gimli	'It is said that the skill of the Dwarves is in their hands rather than in their tongues '
Glóin	's hand. `
Eärendil	`And you, Ring-bearer,'
Varda	`Ah! like gold fall the leaves in the wind, long years numberless as the wings of trees! The long years have passed like swift draughts of the sweet mead in lofty halls beyond the West, beneath the blue vaults of Varda wherein the stars tremble in the song of her voice, holy and queenly. Who now shall refill the cup for me? For now the Kindler, Varda, the Queen of the Stars, from Mount Everwhite has uplifted her hands like clouds, and all paths are drowned deep in shadow; and out of a grey country darkness lies on the foaming waves between us, and mist covers the jewels of Calacirya for ever. Now lost, lost to those from the East is Valimar! Farewell! Maybe thou shalt find Valimar. Maybe even thou shalt find it. Farewell! '
Legolas	`I have looked the last upon that which was fairest,'
Legolas	`Nay! '
Gimli	`Maybe,'
Sam	`Swans! '
Frodo	`How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks! '
Rohan	'But we have not journeyed far south yet,'
Pippin	's gift. Merry and Pippin in the middle boat were ill at ease, for Boromir sat muttering to himself, sometimes biting his nails, as if some restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimes seizing a paddle and driving the boat close behind Aragorn'
Lothlórien	`Well, what was it? '
Frodo	`It wasn'
Frodo	`The log'
Sam	`That I won'
Gimli	'That'
Gamgee	`I said to myself: "
Lórien	'I should make nothing of it but a log and the dusk and sleep in your eyes Sam, said Frodo, if this was the first time that those eyes had been seen. But it isn'
Bilbo	`Ah,'
Moria	`Yes, that is what I have feared for some time,'
Sam	`That'
Frodo	`I might,'
Sam	`It'
Frodo	'What is it? '
Frodo	`Gollum,'
Moria	`Ah! '
Legolas	'Yes.'
Sarn Gebir	`Come! '
Sarn Gebir	`Hoy there, Aragorn! '
Anduin	'I am out of my reckoning,'
Boromir	'All together, paddle! '
Sam	's hood; and a third stood fast in the gunwale of the second boat, close by Merry'
Legolas	`Yrch!'
Gimli	`Orcs! '
Sam	`Gollum'
Legolas	`Elbereth Gilthoniel!'
Gimli	'Praised be the bow of Galadriel, and the hand and eye of Legolas! '
Legolas	'But who can say what it hit?'
Moria	'I cannot,'
Frodo	'It was not a Balrog,'
Boromir	'What do you think? '
Frodo	`I think - No, I will not say,'
Wilderland	`It'
Silverlode	`And perhaps that was the way of it,'
Swift	`Nay, time does not tarry ever,'
Caras Galadhon	`But the wearing is slow in Lórien,'
Tim	'That should not have been said outside Lórien, not even to me,'
Sam	`I can'
Sarn Gebir	`Perhaps so,'
Boromir	'I do not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the River any further,'
Argonath	`But the Enemy holds the eastern bank,'
Amon Hen	`No! '
Wilderland	`Boats of the Elves would not sink, maybe,'
Boromir	'Seldom in my life has any boat come out of the North, and the Orcs prowl on the east-shore,'
Boromir	`That would not be easy, even if we were all Men,'
Master Boromir	'Aye, we will,'
Argonath	'Well, here we are, and here we must pass another night,'
Tom	`Let us rest as much as we can now,'
Ranger	`Fear not! '
Isildur	'Fear not! '
Amon Hen	`Behold Tol Brandir! '
Parth Galen	'Here we will rest tonight,'
Frodo	`Why are you waking? '
Frodo	`Why? '
Amon Hen	`I feared as much,'
Gondor	`The day has come at last,'
Gandalf	'Well, Frodo,'
Gamgee	'Plain as a pikestaff it is, but it'
Boromir	`You are kind,'
Frodo	'I think I know already what counsel you would give, Boromir,'
Boromir	`Warning? Warning against what? '
Frodo	'No hope while the Ring lasts,'
Elrond	'Ah! The Ring! '
Boromir	'As you wish. I care not,'
Frodo	'Were you not at the Council? '
Power	'So you go on,'
Frodo	'Surely you see it, my friend?'
Frodo	'No, I am afraid,'
Boromir	`Then you will come to Minas Tirith? '
Frodo	`You misunderstand me,'
Boromir	'But you will come, at least for a while? '
Boromir	`Why are you so unfriendly? '
Frodo	`No! no! '
Boromir	`It is by our own folly that the Enemy will defeat us,'
Boromir	`Come, come, my friend! '
Sauron	'Miserable trickster!'
Frodo	'What have I said? '
Merry	`I will do now what I must,'
Sam	'They'
Gandalf	`We may remain there for a while and make a brave stand; but the Lord Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even Elrond said was beyond his power: either to keep the Burden secret. or to hold off the full might of the Enemy when he comes to take it. Which way would any of us choose in Frodo'
Legolas	'Grievous is our loss,'
Lothlórien	`And so should I,'
Legolas	`And I too will go with him,'
Legolas	'It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,'
Merry	`That won'
Pippin	'We must stop him,'
Master Boromir	'Begging your pardon,'
Baggins	`Now where'
Pippin	'Stop him! Don'
Pippin	`Well, I wish Frodo would "
Frodo	`Where have you been, Boromir? '
Boromir	'Is that all that you have to say? '
Sam	`This is bad!'
Merry	'But he wouldn'
Pippin	`But where did he go? Where is he? '
Sam	`An hour since he vanished! '
Boromir	`We shall all be scattered and lost,'
Amon Hen	`Come with me, Sam! '
Sam	`Whoa, Sam Gamgee! '
Sam	'Steady, Gamgee! '
Sam	`Coming, Mr. Frodo! Coming! '
Frodo	`Up you come, Sam my lad! '
Sam	`Save me, Mr. Frodo! '
Sam	'Oh, Mr. Frodo, that'
Sam	`Safely! '
Frodo	'It would be the death of you to come with me, Sam,'
Sam	`Not as certain as being left behind,'
Frodo	`Now, Sam,'
Sam	`Of course it is,'
Sam	'Just hold on a moment, and I'
Sam	`So all my plan is spoilt! '
Sam	`Yet we may, Mr Frodo. We may,'
Hobbit	'history'
Christopher	'end'
Hobbit	"The Shadow of the Past'
Hobbit	'the Big Folk'
Hobbit	's time that was very ancient history. The last battle, before this story opens, and indeed the only one that had ever been fought within the borders of the Shire, was beyond living memory: the Battle of Greenfields, S.R. 1147, in which Bandobras Took routed an invasion of Orcs. Even the weathers had grown milder, and the wolves that had once come ravening out of the North in bitter white winters were now only a grandfather'
Hobbit	'art'
Shire	"colonists"
Shire	'government'
Farthing	'beat the bounds'
Hobbit	'nephew'
Grey	'accident'
Bilbo	'precious'
Bilbo	'precious'
Bilbo	'precious'
Bilbo	'birthday present'
Peregrin	's Writer, finished this work in IV 172. It is an exact copy in all details of the Thain'
Thain	'Translations from the Elvish'
Tuckborough	'shire-words'
Frodo	"but they are not to go any further. It’s mine anyway."
Goldberry	'My fair lady, clad all in silver green! We have never said farewell to her, nor seen her since the evening!'
Goldberry	'Farewell, Elf-friend, it was a merry meeting!'
Merry	'and that must mark the Road. All along it for many leagues east of the Bridge there are trees growing. Some say they were planted in the old days.'
Merry	't you keep up?'
Merry	'Hoy! Frodo! Hoy!'
Frodo	's feet; and there was Tom'
Tom	'Let us get out on to clean grass! You must help me bear them.'
Merry	'What am I saying? I have been dreaming. Where did you get to, Frodo?'
Frodo	't want to speak of it. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let us go on!'
Sam	'Where are my clothes?'
Pippin	'Why not?'
Tom	've found yourselves again, out of the deep water. Clothes are but little loss, if you escape from drowning. Be glad, my merry friends, and let the warm sunlight heal now heart and limb! Cast off these cold rags! Run naked on the grass, while Tom goes a-hunting!'
Tom	're on your own legs trying to trot beside them.'
Tom	't be always near to open doors and willow-cracks. Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting.'
Tom	'free to all finders, birds, beasts. Elves or Men, and all kindly creatures'
Tom	'yet still some go wandering, sons of forgotten kings walking in loneliness, guarding from evil things folk that are heedless.'
Tom	't lost more than two days by my short cut through the Forest! But perhaps the delay will prove useful - it may have put them off our trail.'
Pippin	'do you think we may be pursued, tonight?'
Tom Bom	'nor perhaps the next day. But do not trust my guess; for I cannot tell for certain. Out east my knowledge fails. Tom is not master of Riders from the Black Land far beyond his country.'
Tom	'll find an old inn that is called The Prancing Pony. Barliman Butterbur is the worthy keeper. There you can stay the night, and afterwards the morning will speed you upon your way. Be bold, but wary! Keep up your merry hearts, and ride to meet your fortune!'
Bombadil	'll be like The Green Dragon away back home! What sort of folk are they in Bree?'
Merry	'as well as Big Folk. I daresay it will be homelike enough. The Pony is a good inn by all accounts. My people ride out there now and again.'
Shire	't make yourselves too much at home! Please remember -all of you - that the name of Baggins must not be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given.'
Frodo	'We are journeying east and cannot go further tonight.'
Hobbit	's more, out of the Shire by their talk,'
Shire	'll pardon my wondering what business takes you away east of Bree! What may your names be, might I ask?'
Merry	'I am Mr. Brandybuck. Is that enough for you? The Bree-folk used to be fair-spoken to travellers, or so I had heard.'
Harry	're oat the only guests.'
Tom Bom	's homelike enough inside.'
Barliman Butterbur	'Now what does that remind me of? Might I ask your names, sir?'
Brandybuck	'and this is Sam Gamgee. My name is Underhill.'
Butterbur	't often get a party out of the Shire nowadays, and I should be sorry not to make you welcome. But there is such a crowd already in the house tonight as there hasn'
Nob	'Where are you, you woolly-footed slow-coach? Nob!'
Bob	's five ponies that have to be stabled. He must find room somehow.'
Butterbur	't doubt. As soon as may be. This way now!'
Nob	't come, ring and shout!'
Merry	't forget that you are supposed to be escaping in secret, and are still on the high-road and not very far from the Shire!'
Pippin	't forget that it is safer indoors!'
Frodo	'Old Barliman here'
Bree	've a right to live, same as other folk,'
Butterbur	't think you introduced him?'
Ranger	's no accounting for East and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangers and the Shire-folk, begging your pardon. Funny you should ask about him.'
Strider	'I am very pleased to meet you. Master - Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name right.'
Underhill	' he went on, watching Frodo'
Frodo	'a few suitable words'
Bob	's have it again, master! Come on now! Once more!'
Strider	'Why did you do that? Worse than anything your friends could have said! You have put your foot in it! Or should I say your finger?'
Strider	'but we had better wait until the uproar has died down. Then, if you please, Mr. Baggins, I should like a quiet word with you.'
Frodo	'You may hear something to your advantage.'
Frodo	'll talk to you later.'
Butterbur	't see him, if you take my meaning. He just vanished into thin air, in a manner of speaking.'
Frodo	've just been having a few words with Strider in the comer.'
Underhill	'Frightening my customers and breaking up my crocks with your acrobatics!'
Frodo	'It was quite unintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate accident.'
Underhill	't take to it all of a sudden.'
Butterbur	'clock?'
Underhill	're willing.'
Pippin	'Who are you, and what do you want?'
Strider	'and though he may have forgotten it, your friend promised to have a quiet talk with me.'
Frodo	'What have you to say?'
Strider	'But, of course, I have my price.'
Frodo	'Just this: you must take me along with you, until I wish to leave you.'
Frodo	'Even if I wanted another companion, I should not agree to any such thing, until I knew a good deal more about you, and your business.'
Strider	'You seem to be coming to your senses again, and that is all to the good. You have been much too careless so far. Very well! I will tell you what I know, and leave the reward to you. You may be glad to grant it, when you have heard me.'
Frodo	'What do you know?'
Strider	'and though I cannot disappear, I have hunted many wild and wary things and I can usually avoid being seen, if I wish. Now, I was behind the hedge this evening on the Road west of Bree, when four hobbits came out of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said to old Bombadil or to one another, but one thing interested me. Please remember, said one of them, that the name Baggins must not be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given. That interested me so much that I followed them here. I slipped over the gate just behind them. Maybe Mr. Baggins has an honest reason for leaving his name behind; but if so, I should advise him and his friends to be more careful.'
Bree	'and I have still to learn why it interests you. Mr. Strider may have an honest reason for spying and eavesdropping; but if so, I should advise him to explain it.'
Sam	'Black horsemen have passed through Bree. On Monday one came down the Greenway, they say; and another appeared later, coming up the Greenway from the south.'
Pippin	'And the landlord seems to have heard something. Why did he press us to join the company? And why on earth did we behave so foolishly: we ought to have stayed quiet in here.'
Strider	'I would have stopped your going into the common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper would not let me in to see you, or take a message.'
Butterbur	'But I hope we shall get to know one another better. When we do, I hope you will explain what happened at the end of your song. For that little prank---'
Strider	'Accident, then. That accident has made your position dangerous.'
Frodo	'I knew these horsemen were pursuing me; but now at any rate they seem to have missed me and to have gone away.'
Bill	". Not all of those Southerners mean well; and as for Ferny, he would sell anything to anybody; or make mischief for amusement.'
Shire	't go far. They will come on you in the wild, in some dark place where there is no help. Do you wish them to find you? They are terrible!'
Frodo	's no reason why we should let him go leading us out into some dark place far from help, as he puts it.'
Pippin	't see why you should warn us to take care, and yet ask us to take you on trust. Why the disguise? Who are you? What do you really know about - about my business; and how do you know it?'
Strider	'But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You will never get to Rivendell now on your own, and to trust me is your only chance. You must make up your mind. I will answer some of your questions, if that will help you to do so. But why should you believe my story, if you do not trust me already? Still here it is---'
Butterbur	'But this one is taller than some and fairer than most, and he has a cleft in his chin: perky chap with a bright eye. Begging your pardon, but he said it, not me.'
Gandalf	't be undone. '
Gandalf	'm in a hurry, said he, and I'
Butterbur	'Then your right name is Baggins?'
Frodo	've taken a long time to come to the point.'
Butterbur	's any help I can give, you'
Underhill	'll be grateful, he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off, seemingly.'
Baggins	'd had bite or sup, he did.'
Strider	'And much trouble would have been saved, if you had let him in, Barliman.'
Frodo	'He came to offer me his help.'
Butterbur	't take up with a Ranger.'
Strider	'A fat innkeeper who only remembers his own name because people shout it at him all day? They cannot stay in The Pony for ever, and they cannot go home. They have a long road before them. Will you go with them and keep the black men off?'
Underhill	'd like to know?'
Frodo	's a long tale. But if you mean to help me, I ought to warn you that you will be in danger as long as I am in your house. These Black Riders: I am not sure, but I think, I fear they come from---'
Strider	'From Mordor, Barliman, if that means anything to you.'
Butterbur	't know what the likes of me can do against, against---'
Strider	'Not much, Barliman, but every little helps. You can let Mr. Underhill stay here tonight, as Mr. Underhill, and you can forget the name of Baggins, till he is far away.'
Baggins	's going off has been heard before tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has been doing some guessing in his slow pate: and there are others in Bree quicker in the uptake than he is.'
Butterbur	'll keep watch tonight; but you had best get some sleep, if you can.'
Frodo	'We must get off as early as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please.'
Underhill	's your Mr. Brandybuck?'
Merry	'I am afraid he is out. He said something about going for a breath of air.'
Butterbur	'd better send Nob to look for him. Good night to you all!'
Gandalf	's. Inside, written in the wizard'
Butterbur	'He deserves roasting. If I had got this at once, we might all have been safe in Rivendell by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he was going into great danger.'
Gandalf	'It would have saved time.'
Strider	'that I hoped you would take to me for my own sake. A hunted man sometimes wearies of distrust and longs for friendship. But there, I believe my looks are against me.'
Pippin	'But handsome is as handsome does, as we say in the Shire; and I daresay we shall all look much the same after lying for days in hedges and ditches.'
Strider	'And you would die first, unless you are made of sterner stuff than you look to be.'
Pippin	'You never mentioned Gandalf, till this letter came out. You might be a play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with you. You might have done in the real Strider and took his clothes. What have you to say to that?'
Strider	'but I am afraid my only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real Strider, I could kill you. And I should have killed you already without so much talk. If I was after the Ring, I could have it - NOW!'
Strider	'I am Aragorn son of Arathorn; and if by life or death I can save you, I will.'
Frodo	'or at least I wished to. You have frightened me several times tonight, but never in the way that servants of the Enemy would, or so I imagine. I think one of his spies would - well, seem fairer and feel fouler, if you understand.'
Strider	'I look foul and feel fair. Is that it? All that is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are lost.'
Gandalf	's letter, if you have never seen it?'
Sam	'But the time is near when it shall be forged anew.'
Sam	's permission we will call that settled. Strider shall be your guide. We shall have a rough road tomorrow. Even if we are allowed to leave Bree unhindered, we can hardly hope now to leave it unnoticed. But I shall try to get lost as soon as possible. I know one or two ways out of Bree-land other than the main road. If once we shake off the pursuit, I shall make for Weathertop.'
Weathertop	's that?'
Gandalf	'Do you know where he is, or what he is doing?'
Strider	' he said. '
Black	's absence, I mean?'
Strider	'But do not give up hope! Gandalf is greater than you Shire-folk know - as a rule you can only see his jokes and toys. But this business of ours will be his greatest task.'
Pippin	'but I am dead tired. In spite of all the danger and worry I must go to bed, or sleep where I sit. Where is that silly fellow, Merry? It would be the last straw, if we had to go out in the dark to look for him.'
Merry	'I have seen them, Frodo! I have seen them! Black Riders!'
Black	'Where?'
Merry	's. I will explain later.'
Merry	'I tried to follow. Of course, it vanished almost at once; but I went round the corner and on as far as the last house on the Road.'
Merry	'but it was foolish.'
Merry	't hear a word that was said. I did not creep any closer, because I began to tremble all over. Then I felt terrified, and I turned back, and was just going to bolt home, when something came behind me and I... I fell over.'
Brandybuck	" he says to me, when I shook him. Very queer he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he got up and ran back here like a hare.'
Merry	't know what came over me.'
Strider	'The Black Breath. The Riders must have left their horses outside, and passed back through the South-gate in secret. They will know all the news now, for they have visited Bill Ferny; and probably that Southerner was a spy as well. Something may happen in the night, before we leave Bree.'
Merry	'They are not all here yet. And in any case that is not their way. In dark and loneliness they are strongest; they will not openly attack a house where there are lights and many people -not until they are desperate, not while all the long leagues of Eriador still lie before us. But their power is in terror, and already some in Bree are in their clutch. They will drive these wretches to some evil work: Ferny, and some of the strangers, and, maybe, the gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at West-gate on Monday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking when they left him.'
Frodo	'What are we to do?'
Nob	've ruffled up the clothes and put in a bolster down the middle of each bed. And I made a nice imitation of your head with a brown woollen mat, Mr. Bag - Underhill, sir,'
Pippin	'But what will happen when they have penetrated the disguise?'
Strider	'Let us hope to hold the fort till morning.'
Merry	'Very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish I had been there to see. The worthies of Bree will be discussing it a hundred years hence.'
Bolger	't got it!'
Strider	'But for the present you may be left in peace, when you have got rid of us. We will leave at once. Never mind about breakfast: a drink and a bite standing will have to do. We shall be packed in a few minutes.'
Butterbur	'. But very soon he came back in dismay. The ponies had vanished! The stable-doors had all been opened in the night, and they were gone: not only Merry'
Frodo	'We should not go much slower on foot, not on the roads that I mean to take. I was going to walk in any case. It is the food and stores that trouble me. We cannot count on getting anything to eat between here and Rivendell, except what we take with us; and we ought to take plenty to spare; for we may be delayed, or forced to go round-about, far out of the direct way. How much are you prepared to carry on your backs?'
Butterbur	't suppose we could hire them, but we might be able to buy them,'
Bree	'll rout out Bob and send him round as soon as may be.'
Strider	'you had better do that. I am afraid we shall have to try to get one pony at least. But so ends all hope of starting early, and slipping away quietly! We might as well have blown a horn to announce our departure. That was part of their plan, no doubt.'
Merry	's get hold of Nob!'
Bill	're placed, not if I knows Bill Ferny.'
Bill	't the beast bolt back to him with all our stuff, or help in tracking us, or something?'
Strider	's door. But there does not seem any choice. What does he want for it?'
Bill	's price was twelve silver pennies; and that was indeed at least three times the pony'
Merry	's ponies had escaped altogether, and eventually (having a good deal of sense) they made their way to the Downs in search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they came under the care of Tom Bombadil for a while, and were well-off. But when news of the events at Bree came to Tom'
Butterbur	' But it appeared that he was nobody'
Butterbur	'I should like nothing better than to stay in your house in peace for a while.'
Merry	'll miss them both before long.'
Sammie	't go ill-treating my poor old pony! Pah!'
Bill	'Waste of a good apple,'
Bree	'This is where we leave the open and take to cover,'
Pippin	'Our last short cut through woods nearly ended in disaster.'
Strider	't go wrong.'
Bill	't suppose they are far away. If they think we have made for Archet, so much the better.'
Pippin	'Midgewater! There are more midges than water!'
Strider	'It is too distant to make out. It is like lightning that leaps up from the hill-tops.'
Weathertop	'The Old Road, which we have left far away on our right, runs to the south of it and passes not far from its foot. We might reach it by noon tomorrow, if we go straight towards it. I suppose we had better do so.'
Sam	'You do make me feel uncomfortable and lonesome, Strider!'
Strider	'I think the best thing is to go as straight eastward from here as we can, to make for the line of hills, not for Weathertop. There we can strike a path I know that runs at their feet; it will bring us to Weathertop from the north and less openly. Then we shall see what we shall see.'
Frodo	'considering that there is actually a good deal less of me. I hope the thinning process will not go on indefinitely, or I shall become a wraith.'
Merry	'I am not sure that I like it: it has a - well, rather a barrow-wightish look. Is there any barrow on Weathertop?'
Amon Sûl	's head. Yet once it was tall and fair. It is told that Elendil stood there watching for the coming of Gil-galad out of the West, in the days of the Last Alliance.'
Strider	'Who was Gil-galad?'
Sam	'I learned it from Mr. Bilbo when I was a lad. He used to tell me tales like that, knowing how I was always one for hearing about Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo as taught me my letters. He was mighty book-learned was dear old Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote poetry. He wrote what I have just said.'
Strider	'It is pan of the lay that is called The Fall of Gil-galad, which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must have translated it. I never knew that.'
Sam	't learn that part, it gave me the shivers I never thought I should be going that way myself!'
Pippin	't come to that!'
Merry	't blame him for not waiting - if he ever came here.'
Bree	'What do you think of these marks?'
Frodo	'There seems to he a stroke, a dot, and three more strokes,'
Strider	'It might be a sign left by Gandalf, though one cannot be sure. The scratches are fine, and they certainly look fresh. But the marks might mean something quite different, and have nothing to do with us. Rangers use runes, and they come here sometimes.'
Strider	'that they stood for G3, and were a sign that Gandalf was here on October the third: that is three days ago now. It would also show that he was in a hurry and danger was at hand, so that he had no time or did not dare to write anything longer or plainer. If that is so, we must be wary.'
Frodo	'It would be a great comfort to know that he was on the way, in front of us or behind us.'
Strider	'For myself, I believe that he was here, and was in danger. There have been scorching flames here; and now the light that we saw three nights ago in the eastern sky comes back to my mind. I guess that he was attacked on this hill-top, but with what result I cannot tell. He is here no longer, and we must now look after ourselves and make our own way to Rivendell, as best we can '
Bruinen	's journey before us, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road.'
Frodo	'A lot may happen in that time.'
Strider	'The enemy is here!'
Pippin	'Whoever it was put this stuff here meant to come back it seems.'
Strider	'I wish I had waited and explored the ground down here myself,'
Strider	't like this hole: it makes my heart sink somehow.'
Sam	'I do not like this place either; but I cannot think of anywhere better that we could reach before nightfall. At least we are out of sight for the moment, and if we moved we should be much more likely to be seen by spies. All we could do would be to go right out of our way back north on this side of the line of hills, where the land is all much the same as it is here. The Road is watched, but we should have to cross it, if we tried to take cover in the thickets away to the south. On the north side of the Road beyond the hills the country is bare and flat for miles.'
Merry	'I mean, they seem usually to have used their noses rather than their eyes, smelling for us, if smelling is the right word, at least in the daylight. But you made us lie down flat when you saw them down below; and now you talk of being seen, if we move.'
Gandalf	'the Ring draws them.'
Frodo	'If I move I shall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall draw them to me!'
Strider	'You are not alone. Let us take this wood that is set ready for the fire as a sign. There is little shelter or defence here, but fire shall serve for both. Sauron can put fire to his evil uses, as he can all things, but these Riders do not love it, and fear those who wield it. Fire is our friend in the wilderness.'
Sam	" as I can think of, bar shouting.'
Frodo	'We have been careful enough in the last few days, and this supper is no feast; but we have used more than we ought, if we have two weeks still to go, and perhaps more.'
Elrond	's house!'
Merry	'Do you know any more of that old lay that you spoke of?'
Strider	'So also does Frodo, for it concerns us closely.'
Gandalf	'Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of Middle-earth. Gil-galad is Starlight in their tongue. With Elendil, the Elf-friend, he went to the land of---'
Strider	'I do not think that tale should be told now with the servants of the Enemy at hand. If we win through to the house of Elrond, you may hear it there, told in full.'
Sam	'a tale about the Elves before the fading time. I would dearly like to hear more about Elves; the dark seems to press round so close.'
Tinúviel	'in brief - for it is a long tale of which the end is not known; and there are none now, except Elrond, that remember it aright as it was told of old. It is a fair tale, though it is sad, as are all the tales of Middle-earth, and yet it may lift up your hearts.'
Lúthien Tinúviel	's heir; and of him Elwing the White whom Eärendil wedded, he that sailed his ship out of the mists of the world into the seas of heaven with the Silmaril upon his brow. And of Eärendil came the Kings of Númenor, that is Westernesse.'
Merry	'The Moon is rising: it must be getting late.'
Merry	'or I thought I did - away westwards where the moonlight was falling on the flats beyond the shadow of the hill-tops, I thought there were two or three black shapes. They seemed to be moving this way.'
Strider	'Get some of the longer sticks ready in your hands!'
Strider	's that?'
Frodo	' he asked wildly. They were too overjoyed to hear him speak to answer for a while; nor did they understand his question. At length he gathered from Sam that they had seen nothing but the vague shadowy shapes coming towards them. Suddenly to his horror Sam found that his master had vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He heard Frodo'
Black	'nor in league with them. I have been trying to discover something of their movements; but I have found nothing. I cannot think why they have gone and do not attack again. But there is no feeling of their presence anywhere at hand.'
Merry	'You must trust me now. Your Frodo is made of sterner stuff than I had guessed, though Gandalf hinted that it might prove so. He is not slain, and I think he will resist the evil power of the wound longer than his enemies expect. I will do all I can to help and heal him. Guard him well, while I am away!'
Frodo	'The only hurt that it did to his enemy, I fear; for it is unharmed, but all blades perish that pierce that dreadful King. More deadly to him was the name of Elbereth.'
Frodo	'It was this accursed knife that gave the wound. Few now have the skill in healing to match such evil weapons. But I will do what I can.'
Weathertop	'that the enemy has been watching this place for some days. If Gandalf ever came here, then he must have been forced to ride away, and he will not return. In any case we are in great peril here after dark, since the attack of last night, and we can hardly meet greater danger wherever we go.'
Strider	'We have now come to the River Hoarwell, that the Elves call Mitheithel. It flows down out of the Ettenmoors, the troll-fells north of Rivendell, and joins the Loudwater away in the South. Some call it the Greyflood after that. It is a great water before it finds the Sea. There is no way over it below its sources in the Ettenmoors, except by the Last Bridge on which the Road crosses.'
Bruinen	'The Road runs along the edge of the hills for many miles from the Bridge to the Ford of Bruinen. But I have not yet thought how we shall cross that water. One river at a time! We shall be fortunate indeed if we do not find the Last Bridge held against us.'
Bilbo	's account of his journey and the threatening towers on the hills north of the Road, in the country near the Troll'
Strider	'Trolls do not build. No one lives in this land. Men once dwelt here, ages ago; but none remain now. They became an evil people, as legends tell, for they fell under the shadow of Angmar. But all were destroyed in the war that brought the North Kingdom to its end. But that is now so long ago that the hills have forgotten them, though a shadow still lies on the land.'
Peregrin	'The birds and beasts do not tell tales of that son.'
Elendil	' said Strider. '
Merry	'I am afraid this has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully anxious about him. What are we to do? Do you think they will be able to cure him in Rivendell, if we ever get there?'
Strider	'There is nothing more that I can do in the wilderness; and it is chiefly because of his wound that I am so anxious to press on. But I agree that we can go no further tonight.'
Sam	's nothing to be seen but a cold white mark on his shoulder.'
Frodo	'and there is some poison or evil at work that is beyond my skill to drive out. But do not give up hope, Sam!'
Pippin	'There is a path here!'
Pippin	'Come out, you two, and let us get away. Now we know who made the path -and we had better get off it quick.'
Strider	't think we need be afraid. But let us go on down warily, and we shall see.'
Pippin	'Down in a clearing in the woods not far below. We got a sight of them through the tree-trunks. They are very large!'
Strider	'Get up, old stone!'
Frodo	'We are forgetting our family history! These must be the very three that were caught by Gandalf, quarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit.'
Strider	's nest behind his ear. That would be a most unusual ornament for a live troll!'
Bilbo	's first successful adventure was heartening. The sun, too, was warm and comforting, and the mist before his eyes seemed to be lifting a little. They rested for some time in the glade, and took their mid-day meal right under the shadow of the trolls'
Merry	't had a song or a tale for days.'
Weathertop	't think I could sing. Perhaps Sam could dig something out of his memory.'
Merry	's more stored in your head than you let on about.'
Sam	't what I call proper poetry, if you understand me: just a bit of nonsense. But these old images here brought it to my mind.'
Tom	't see why the likes o'
Merry	'It is as well you used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!'
Pippin	've never heard those words before.'
Gamgee	'll end up by becoming a wizard - or a warrior!'
Sam	't want to be neither!'
Merry	's share, I wonder, Frodo?'
Bilbo	'Bilbo gave it all away. He told me he did not feel it was really his, as it came from robbers.'
Black	's horse!'
Strider	'This is Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of Elrond,'
Elf	'I was sent from Rivendell to look for you. We feared that you were in danger upon the road.'
Sam	't go on riding after nightfall. He needs rest.'
Frodo	's shoulder with his fingers, and his face grew graver, as if what he learned disquieted him. But Frodo felt the chill lessen in his side and arm; a little warmth crept down from his shoulder to his hand, and the pain grew easier. The dusk of evening seemed to grow lighter about him, as if a cloud had been withdrawn. He saw his friends'
Glorfindel	'I will shorten the stirrups up to the saddle-skins, and you must sit as tight as you can. But you need not fear: my horse will not let any rider fall that I command him to bear. His pace is light and smooth; and if danger presses too near, he will bear you away with a speed that even the black steeds of the enemy cannot rival.'
Frodo	'I shall not ride him, if I am to be carried off to Rivendell or anywhere else, leaving my friends behind in danger.'
Glorfindel	'if your friends would be in danger if you were not with them! The pursuit would follow you and leave us in peace, I think. It is you, Frodo, and that which you bear that brings us all in peril.'
Glorfindel	's white horse. The pony was laden instead with a great part of the others'
Glorfindel	'for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now swift behind us, and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.'
Frodo	's mind. He thought no longer of his sword. No cry came from him. He shut his eyes and clung to the horse'
Bombadil	'To Mordor we will take you!'
Lúthien	'you shall have neither the Ring nor me!'
Elrond	`It is the morning of October the twenty-fourth, if you want to know.'
Frodo	' at The Prancing Pony; and his madness in putting on the Ring in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking of all these things and trying in vain to bring his memory down to his arriving in Rivendell, there was a long silence, broken only by the soft puffs of Gandalf'
Sam	'And are the others all right?'
Gandalf	`Sam was here until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.'
Frodo	`It all seemed so dim somehow; and it still does.'
Gandalf	'The wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you would have been beyond our aid. But you have some strength in you, my dear hobbit! As you showed in the Barrow. That was touch and go: perhaps the most dangerous moment of all. I wish you could have held out at Weathertop.'
Frodo	`I have not spoken to the others about the Barrow. At first it was too horrible; and afterwards there were other things to think about. How do you know about it?'
Gandalf	" just now, I did not mean it. I think well of you - and of the others. It is no small feat to have come so far, and through such dangers, still bearing the Ring.'
Frodo	`But we needed you. I did not know what to do without you.'
Gandalf	`and that nearly proved our ruin. And yet I am not sure; it may have been better so.'
Elrond	's orders.'
Frodo	'I am wide awake now, and I remember so many things that want explaining. Why were you delayed? You ought to tell me that at least.'
Gandalf	'We shall have a Council, as soon as you are well enough. At the moment I will only say that I was held captive.'
Grey	'There are many powers in the world, for good or for evil. Some are greater than I am. Against some I have not yet been measured. But my time is coming. The Morgul-lord and his Black Riders have come forth. War is preparing!'
Frodo	`it was Strider that saved us. Yet I was afraid of him at first. Sam never quite trusted him. I think, not at any rate until we met Glorfindel.'
Sam	'He has no more doubts now.'
Bill	't know much about Men in the Shire, except perhaps the Breelanders.'
Gandalf	'He is wise enough on his own ground. He thinks less than he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick wall in time (as they say in Bree). But there are few left in Middle-earth like Aragorn son of Arathorn. The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly at an end. It may be that this War of the Ring will be their last adventure.'
Frodo	`I thought they had all vanished long ago. I thought he was only a Ranger.'
Gandalf	`My dear Frodo, that is just what the Rangers are: the last remnant in the North of the great people, the Men of the West. They have helped me before; and I shall need their help in the days to come; for we have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is not yet at rest.'
Frodo	't have to go any further. It is very pleasant just to rest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and I find that has been as much as I want.'
Gandalf	`How do the side and shoulder feel now?'
Frodo	'I can move my arm again a little. Yes, it is coming back to life. It is not cold,'
Gandalf	`It is mending fast. You will soon be sound again. Elrond has cured you: he has tended you for days, ever since you were brought in.'
Gandalf	`It is gone now. It has been melted. And it seems that Hobbits fade very reluctantly. I have known strong warriors of the Big People who would quickly have been overcome by that splinter, which you bore for seventeen days.'
Frodo	`What were the Riders trying to do?'
Gandalf	`not to mention courage. For your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder was pierced; and that was because you resisted to the last. But it was a terribly narrow shave, so to speak. You were in gravest peril while you wore the Ring, for then you were half in the wraith-world yourself, and they might have seized you. You could see them, and they could see you.'
Frodo	`They were terrible to behold! But why could we all see their horses?'
Frodo	't be able to close my eyes until you have finished the story for me.'
Gandalf	`He is not half through yet, and to what he will come in the end not even Elrond can foretell. Not to evil, I think. He may become like a glass filled with a clear light for eyes to see that can.'
Elrond	's folk met them, carrying you slowly towards Rivendell.'
Elrond	`The river of this valley is under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need to bar the Ford. As soon as the captain of the Ringwraiths rode into the water the flood was released. If I may say so, I added a few touches of my own: you may not have noticed, but some of the waves took the form of great white horses with shining white riders; and there were many rolling and grinding boulders. For a moment I was afraid that we had let loose too fierce a wrath, and the flood would get out of hand and wash you all away. There is great vigour in the waters that come down from the snows of the Misty Mountains.'
Frodo	'the tremendous roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends and enemies and all. But now we are safe!'
Gandalf	'Yes, you are all safe for the present. Soon there will be feasting and merrymaking to celebrate the victory at the Ford of Bruinen, and you will all be there in places of honour.'
Frodo	`It is wonderful that Elrond, and Glorfindel and such great lords, not to mention Strider, should take so much trouble and show me so much kindness.'
Gandalf	`I am one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the Ring-bearer. And you are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-finder.'
Bilbo	`I wonder where he is. I wish he was here and could hear all about it. It would have made him laugh, The cow jumped over the Moon! And the poor old troll!'
Bilbo	`a perfect house, whether you like food or sleep, or story-telling or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or a pleasant mixture of them all'
Sam	's fine to see you up and yourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were ready to come down, and I thought he was joking.'
Frodo	's go and look for the rest of the party!'
Sam	'm getting to know some of the ways of the place.'
Sam	's content. Come on, guide me round the corners!'
Pippin	`Here is our noble cousin! Make way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!'
Gandalf	`Evil things do not come into this valley; but all the same we should not name them. The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of Mordor, whose power is again stretching out over the world! We are sitting in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.'
Pippin	`He thinks I need keeping in order. But it seems impossible, somehow, to feel gloomy or depressed in this place. I feel I could sing, if I knew the right song for the occasion.'
Frodo	`Though at the moment I feel more like eating and drinking!'
Pippin	`You have shown your usual cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.'
Merry	`As soon as Gandalf reported that you were recovered, the preparations began.'
Arwen	's house. But her brothers, Elladan and Elrohir, were out upon errantry: for they rode often far afield with the Rangers of the North, forgetting never their mother'
Baggins	'Am I right in guessing that you are the Glóin, one of the twelve companions of the great Thorin Oakenshield?'
Frodo	'And I do not ask, for I have already been told that you are the kinsman and adopted heir of our friend Bilbo the renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery.'
Glóin	'I wonder greatly what brings four hobbits on so long a journey. Nothing like it has happened since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps I should not inquire too closely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?'
Elrond	`to learn what brings so important a dwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.'
Glóin	'If you have not heard, I think we will not speak yet of that either. Master Elrond will summon us all ere long, I believe, and then we shall all hear many things. But there is much else that may be told.'
Dale	`and like Beorn of old they are not over fond of dwarves. Still, they are trusty, and that is much in these days. Nowhere are there any men so friendly to us as the Men of Dale. They are good folk, the Bardings. The grandson of Bard the Bowman rules them, Brand son of Bain son of Bard. He is a strong king, and his realm now reaches far south and east of Esgaroth.'
Glóin	' tongues run on when speaking of their handiwork, they say.'
Glóin	'It is largely on account of Balin that I have come to ask the advice of those that dwell in Rivendell. But tonight let us speak of merrier things!'
Dale	's sides! Then you would see that we have not been idle.'
Frodo	'How surprised Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in the Desolation of Smaug!'
Glóin	'You were very fond of Bilbo were you not?'
Frodo	'I would rather see him than all the towers and palaces in the world.'
Gandalf	`Here you will hear many songs and tales-if you can keep awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty and quiet, and people come here who wish for peace, and thought. There is always a fire here, all the year round, but there is little other light.'
Elrond	`Here is a friend that you have long missed.'
Bilbo	`So you have got here at last. I hoped you would manage it. Well, well! So all this feasting is in your honour, I hear. I hope you enjoyed yourself?'
Frodo	't I been allowed to see you before?'
Sam	't go in for such things much now. And I had something else to do.'
Master Elrond	't suppose I shall ever get them right. There will be such a deal of singing that the ideas will be driven clean out of my head. I shall have to get my friend the Dúnadan to help me. Where is he?'
Elrond	' Messengers were sent to find Bilbo'
Balin	't really good enough for Rivendell. And I listen and I think. Time doesn'
Bilbo	" Odd sort of remark, just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking after you, so I let things be. I am frightfully glad to see you safe and sound.'
Frodo	`It looks just the same as ever it did.'
Bilbo	's have some real News! Tell me all about the Shire!'
Bilbo	'Ah, there you are at last, Dúnadan!'
Frodo	`You seem to have a lot of names.'
Bilbo	`What do you call him that for?'
Bree	'and that is how I was introduced to him.'
Dúnadan	`He is often called that here. But I thought you knew enough Elvish at least to know dún-udan: Man of the West, Númenorean. But this is not the time for lessons!'
Bilbo	'But often I must put mirth aside. Elladan and Elrohir have returned out of the Wild unlooked-for, and they had tidings that I wished to hear at once.'
Bilbo	's go off into a corner and polish it up!'
Strider	`Let me hear it!'
Bilbo	'But it would be too tiring to repeat it all.'
Dúnadan	's?'
Hobbit	're as different as peas and apples.'
Lindir	`Or to shepherds. But Mortals have not been our study. We have other business.'
Bilbo	'll leave you to guess, if you want to.'
Frodo	't often get asked for a second hearing. What did you think of it?'
Bilbo	't know why. Otherwise he obviously thought the whole thing rather above my head, and he said that if I had the cheek to make verses about Eärendil in the house of Elrond, it was my affair. I suppose he was right.'
Frodo	't understand that it was really you speaking until near the end.'
Bilbo	'Not that hobbits would ever acquire quite the elvish appetite for music and poetry and tales. They seem to like them as much as food, or more. They will be going on for a long time yet. What do you say to slipping off for some more quiet talk?'
Bilbo	`They will sing that, and other songs of the Blessed Realm, many times tonight. Come on!'
Sam	`but I was just wondering if you would be wanting anything.'
Bilbo	`I guess you mean that it is time your master went to bed.'
Bilbo	'll take a walk, I think, and look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!'
Bilbo	`Feel ready for the great council?'
Frodo	`But most of all I should like to go walking today and explore the valley. I should like to get into those pine-woods up there.'
Gandalf	`But we cannot make any plans yet. There is much to hear and decide today.'
Elrond	`Come along now! Both you and Bilbo are wanted.'
Glóin	's side: his son Gimli. Beside Glorfindel there were several other counsellors of Elrond'
Elrond	`is Boromir, a man from the South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks for counsel. I have bidden him to be present, for here his questions will be answered.'
Glóin	`that a shadow of disquiet fell upon our people. Whence it came we did not at first perceive. Words began to be whispered in secret: it was said that we were hemmed in a narrow place, and that greater wealth and splendour would be found in a wider world. Some spoke of Moria: the mighty works of our fathers that are called in our own tongue Khazad-dûm; and they declared that now at last we had the power and numbers to return.'
Moria	"that one of these was known to you on a time."
Sauron	"and get from him, willing or no, a little ring, the least of rings, that once he stole. It is but a trifle that Sauron fancies, and an earnest of your good will. Find it, and three rings that the Dwarf sires possessed of old shall be returned to you, and the realm of Moria shall be yours for ever. Find only news of the thief, whether he still lives and where, and you shall have great reward and lasting friendship from the Lord. Refuse, and things will not seem so well. Do you refuse?"
Dáin	"I say neither yea nor nay. I must consider this message and what it means under its fair cloak."
Elrond	`It recalled to me the glory of the Elder Days and the hosts of Beleriand, so many great princes and captains were assembled. And yet not so many, nor so fair, as when Thangorodrim was broken, and the Elves deemed that evil was ended for ever, and it was not so.'
Elrond	'I thought that the fall of Gil-galad was a long age ago.'
Narsil	's sword, and took it for his own.'
Boromir	`If ever such a tale was told in the South, it has long been forgotten. I have heard of the Great Ring of him that we do not name; but we believed that it perished from the world in the ruin of his first realm. Isildur took it! That is tidings indeed.'
Elrond	`Isildur took it, as should not have been. It should have been cast then into Orodruin'
Elrond	`Here is the Sword that was Broken!'
Isildur	's son of Minas Ithil. He is the Chief of the Dúnedain in the North, and few are now left of that folk.'
Gandalf	`The time has come. Hold it up, and then Boromir will understand the remainder of his riddle.'
Isildur	's Bane!'
Boromir	`Is then the doom of Minas Tirith come at last? But why then should we seek a broken sword?'
Isildur	's Bane, was found. Now you have seen the sword that you have sought, what would you ask? Do you wish for the House of Elendil to return to the Land of Gondor?'
Boromir	`Yet we are hard pressed, and the Sword of Elendil would be a help beyond our hope-if such a thing could indeed return out of the shadows of the past.'
Frodo	`for the Dúnadan, a long time ago when he first told me about himself. I almost wish that my adventures were not over, and that I could go with him when his day comes.'
Boromir	' he said. '
Strider	" I am to one fat man who lives within a day'
Isildur	's Bane is found. Battle is at hand. The Sword shall be reforged. I will come to Minas Tirith.'
Isildur	's hand; but Isildur perished ere this age of the world began, they say. How do the Wise know that this ring is his? And how has it passed down the years, until it is brought hither by so strange a messenger?'
Bilbo	`Already the Sun is climbing to noon, and I feel the need of something to strengthen me.'
Elrond	`But I do so now. Come! Tell us your tale. And if you have not yet cast your story into verse, you may tell it in plain words. The briefer, the sooner shall you be refreshed.'
Glóin	`I ask them to forget it and forgive me. I only wished to claim the treasure as my very own in those days, and to be rid of the name of thief that was put on me. But perhaps I understand things a little better now. Anyway, this is what happened.'
Bilbo	't kept on interrupting. I tried to make a few notes, but we shall have to go over it all again together some time, if I am to write it up. There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got here!'
Frodo	'But the story still does not seem complete to me. I still want to know a good deal, especially about Gandalf.'
Galdor	's trove is indeed the Great Ring of long debate, unlikely though that may seem to those who know less. But may we not hear the proofs? And I would ask this also. What of Saruman? He is learned in the lore of the Rings, yet he is not among us. What is his counsel-if he knows the things that we have heard?'
Galdor	`I had not overlooked them, and they shall be answered. But these things it is the part of Gandalf to make clear; and I call upon him last, for it is the place of honour, and in all this matter he has been the chief.'
Galdor	' At this Glóin stirred, but did not speak. `
Sauron	"'
Elrond	`and but for your vigilance the Darkness, maybe, would already be upon us. But say on!'
Isildur	's fault, I went with Gandalf on the long and hopeless search.'
Boromir	'All know in Gondor that he went first to Minas Anor and dwelt a while with his nephew Meneldil, instructing him, before he committed to him the rule of the South Kingdom. In that time he planted there the last sapling of the White Tree in memory of his brother.'
Gandalf	`but not without profit. For one thing, the tale he told of his loss agreed with that which Bilbo has now told openly for the first time; but that mattered little, since I had already guessed it. But I learned then first that Gollum'
Boromir	`He is a small thing, you say, this Gollum? Small, but great in mischief. What became of him? To what doom did you put him?'
Legolas	`The tidings that I was sent to bring must now be told. They are not good, but only here have I learned how evil they may seem to this company. Sméagol, who is now called Gollum, has escaped.'
Legolas	's bidding, much though we wearied of the task. But Gandalf bade us hope still for his cure, and we had not the heart to keep him ever in dungeons under the earth, where he would fall back into his old black thoughts.'
Gandalf	`Pray do not interrupt, my good Glóin. That was a regrettable misunderstanding, long set right. If all the grievances that stand between Elves and Dwarves are to be brought up here, we may as well abandon this Council.'
Legolas	'In the days of fair weather we led Gollum through the woods; and there was a high tree standing alone far from the others which he liked to climb. Often we let him mount up to the highest branches, until he felt the free wind; but we set a guard at the tree'
Gandalf	"I was seeking you. But I am a stranger in these parts. All I knew was that you might be found in a wild region with the uncouth name of Shire."
Radagast	"but what it is that makes him look to these distant and desolate parts, I cannot guess."
Shire	"Who told you, and who sent you? "
Radagast	"And he told me to say that if you feel the need, he will help; but you must seek his aid at once, or it will be too late."
Radagast	"for I have wasted time in looking for you, and the days are running short. I was told to find you before Midsummer, and that is now here. Even if you set out from this spot, you will hardly reach him before the Nine discover the land that they seek. I myself shall turn back at once."
Grey	"For aid? It has seldom been heard of that Gandalf the Grey sought for aid, one so cunning and so wise, wandering about the lands, and concerning himself in every business, whether it belongs to him or not."
Radagast	"Radagast the Bird-tamer! Radagast the Simple! Radagast the Fool! Yet he had just the wit to play the part that I set him. For you have come, and that was all the purpose of my message. And here you will stay, Gandalf the Grey, and rest from journeys. For I am Saruman the Wise, Saruman Ring-maker, Saruman of Many Colours! "
Gandalf	"I said we, for we it may be, if you will join with me. A new Power is rising. Against it the old allies and policies will not avail us at all. There is no hope left in Elves or dying Númenor. This then is one choice before you. before us. We may join with that Power. It would be wise, Gandalf. There is hope that way. Its victory is at hand; and there will be rich reward for those that aided it. As the Power grows, its proved friends will also grow; and the Wise, such as you and I, may with patience come at last to direct its courses, to control it. We can bide our time, we can keep our thoughts in our hearts, deploring maybe evils done by the way, but approving the high and ultimate purpose: Knowledge, Rule, Order; all the things that we have so far striven in vain to accomplish, hindered rather than helped by our weak or idle friends. There need not be, there would not be, any real change in our designs, only in our means."
Saruman	"I have heard speeches of this kind before, but only in the mouths of emissaries sent from Mordor to deceive the ignorant. I cannot think that you brought me so far only to weary my ears."
Gandalf	"Why not? The Ruling Ring? If we could command that, then the Power would pass to us. That is in truth why I brought you here. For I have many eyes in my service, and I believe that you know where this precious thing now lies. Is it not so? Or why do the Nine ask for the Shire, and what is your business there? "
Saruman	"only one hand at a time can wield the One, and you know that well, so do not trouble to say we! But I would not give it, nay, I would not give even news of it to you, now that I learn your mind. You were head of the Council, but you have unmasked yourself at last. Well, the choices are, it seems, to submit to Sauron, or to yourself. I will take neither. Have you others to offer? "
Frodo	`You were walking backwards and forwards. The moon shone in your hair.'
Gandalf	`but it suddenly came back to me. I had quite forgotten it. It came some time ago; after I left the Shire, I think.'
Gandalf	'as you will see. I was in an evil plight. And those who know me will agree that I have seldom been in such need, and do not bear such misfortune well. Gandalf the Grey caught like a fly in a spider'
Rohan	"for that is not very far off."
Boromir	`It is a lie that comes from the Enemy. I know the Men of Rohan; true and valiant, our allies, dwelling still in the lands that we gave them long ago.'
Boromir	'that they will buy their lives with horses. They love their horses next to their kin. And not without reason, for the horses of the Riddermark come from the fields of the North, far from the Shadow. and their race, as that of their masters, is descended from the free days of old.'
Butterbur	" He expected no less, and when he saw my face he fell down flat and began to melt on the spot.'
Frodo	'He was really very kind to us and did all that he could.'
Gandalf	' he said. `
Butterbur	"He got at them, in spite of all that I could do, and they took up with him. They behaved very queer all the time they were here: wilful, you might say."
Saruman	' he said; `
Erestor	`It seems that he has a power even over the Ring.'
Gandalf	`Say rather that the Ring has no power over him. He is his own master. But he cannot alter the Ring itself, nor break its power over others. And now he is withdrawn into a little land, within bounds that he has set, though none can see them, waiting perhaps for a change of days, and he will not step beyond them.'
Erestor	`Would he not take the Ring and keep it there, for ever harmless?'
Gandalf	`not willingly. He might do so, if all the free folk of the world begged him, but he would not understand the need. And if he were given the Ring, he would soon forget it, or most likely throw it away. Such things have no hold on his mind. He would be a most unsafe guardian; and that alone is answer enough.'
Glorfindel	`to send the Ring to him would only postpone the day of evil. He is far away. We could not now take it back to him, unguessed, unmarked by any spy. And even if we could, soon or late the Lord of the Rings would learn of its hiding place and would bend all his power towards it. Could that power be defied by Bombadil alone? I think not. I think that in the end, if all else is conquered, Bombadil will fall, Last as he was First; and then Night will come.'
Galdor	`but Glorfindel, I think, is right. Power to defy our Enemy is not in him, unless such power is in the earth itself. And yet we see that Sauron can torture and destroy the very hills. What power still remains lies with us, here in Imladris, or with Cirdan at the Havens, or in Lórien. But have they the strength, have we here the strength to withstand the Enemy, the coming of Sauron at the last, when all else is overthrown?'
Elrond	`neither have they.'
Glorfindel	`two things only remain for us to attempt: to send it over the Sea, or to destroy it.'
Elrond	`And they who dwell beyond the Sea would not receive it: for good or ill it belongs to Middle-earth; it is for us who still dwell here to deal with it.'
Glorfindel	'let us cast it into the deeps, and so make the lies of Saruman come true. For it is clear now that even at the Council his feet were already on a crooked path. He knew that the Ring was not lost for ever, but wished us to think so; for he began to lust for it for himself. Yet oft in lies truth is hidden: in the Sea it would be safe.'
Gandalf	`There are many things in the deep waters; and seas and lands may change. And it is not our part here to take thought only for a season, or for a few lives of Men, or for a passing age of the world. We should seek a final end of this menace, even if we do not hope to make one.'
Galdor	'If the return to Iarwain be thought too dangerous, then flight to the S‚a is now fraught with gravest peril. My heart tells me that Sauron will expect us to take the western way, when he learns what has befallen. He soon will. The Nine have been unhorsed indeed but that is but a respite, ere they find new steeds and swifter. Only the waning might of Gondor stands now between him and a march in power along the coasts into the North; and if he comes, assailing the White Towers and the Havens, hereafter the Elves may have no escape from the lengthening shadows of Middle-earth.'
Boromir	'Gondor wanes, you say. But Gondor stands, and even the end of its strength is still very strong.'
Galdor	'And other roads he may find that Gondor does not guard.'
Erestor	`there are but two courses, as Glorfindel already has declared: to hide the Ring for ever; or to unmake it. But both are beyond our power. Who will read this riddle for us?'
Elrond	`At least none can foretell what will come to pass, if we take this road or that. But it seems to me now clear which is the road that we must take. The westward road seems easiest. Therefore it must be shunned. It will be watched. Too often the Elves have fled that way. Now at this last we must take a hard road, a road unforeseen. There lies our hope, if hope it be. To walk into peril-to Mordor. We must send the Ring to the Fire.'
Sauron	's throne, and yet another Dark Lord would appear. And that is another reason why the Ring should be destroyed: as long as it is in the world it will be a danger even to the Wise. For nothing is evil in the beginning. Even Sauron was not so. I fear to take the Ring to hide it. I will not take the Ring to wield it.'
Boromir	`Then in Gondor we must trust to such weapons as we have. And at the least, while the Wise ones guard this Ring, we will fight on. Mayhap the Sword-that-was-Broken may still stem the tide - if the hand that wields it has inherited not an heirloom only, but the sinews of the Kings of Men.'
Boromir	'For though I do not ask for aid, we need it. It would comfort us to know that others fought also with all the means that they have.'
Elrond	`For there are other powers and realms that you know not, and they are hidden from you. Anduin the Great flows past many shores, ere it comes to Argonath and the Gates of Gondor.'
Glóin	'if all these strengths were joined, and the powers of each were used in league. Other rings there may be, less treacherous, that might be used in our need. The Seven are lost to us - if Balin has not found the ring of Thrór which was the last; naught has been heard of it since Thrór perished in Moria. Indeed I may now reveal that it was partly in hope to find that ring that Balin went away.'
Moria	`Thrór gave it to Thráin his son, but not Thráin to Thorin. It was taken with torment from Thráin in the dungeons of Dol Guldur. I came too late.'
Glóin	'When will the day come of our revenge? But still there are the Three. What of the Three Rings of the Elves? Very mighty Rings, it is said. Do not the Elf-lords keep them? Yet they too were made by the Dark Lord long ago. Are they idle? I see Elf-lords here. Will they not say?'
Glóin	`The Three were not made by Sauron, nor did he ever touch them. But of them it is not permitted to speak. So much only in this hour of doubt I may now say. They are not idle. But they were not made as weapons of war or conquest: that is not their power. Those who made them did not desire strength or domination or hoarded wealth, but understanding, making, and healing, to preserve all things unstained. These things the Elves of Middle-earth have in some measure gained, though with sorrow. But all that has been wrought by those who wield the Three will turn to their undoing, and their minds and hearts will become revealed to Sauron, if he regains the One. It would be better if the Three had never been. That is his purpose.'
Elrond	`Some hope that the Three Rings, which Sauron has never touched, would then become free, and their rulers might heal the hurts of the world that he has wrought. But maybe when the One has gone, the Three will fail, and many fair things will fade and be forgotten. That is my belief.'
Glorfindel	'if by it the power of Sauron may be broken, and the fear of his dominion be taken away for ever.'
Erestor	`and yet we come no nearer. What strength have we for the finding of the Fire in which it was made? That is the path of despair. Of folly I would say, if the long wisdom of Elrond did not forbid me.'
Gandalf	`It is not despair, for despair is only for those who see the end beyond all doubt. We do not. It is wisdom to recognize necessity, when all other courses have been weighed, though as folly it may appear to those who cling to false hope. Well, let folly be our cloak, a veil before the eyes of the Enemy! For he is very wise, and weighs all things to a nicety in the scales of his malice. But the only measure that he knows is desire, desire for power; and so he judges all hearts. Into his heart the thought will not enter that any will refuse it, that having the Ring we may seek to destroy it. If we seek this, we shall put him out of reckoning.'
Elrond	`The road must be trod, but it will be very hard. And neither strength nor wisdom will carry us far upon it. This quest may be attempted by the weak with as much hope as the strong. Yet such is oft the course of deeds that move the wheels of the world: small hands do them because they must, while the eyes of the great are elsewhere.'
Master Elrond	' said Bilbo suddenly. '
Bilbo	`If you had really started this affair, you might be expected to finish it. But you know well enough now that starting is too great a claim for any, and that only a small part is played in great deeds by any hero. You need not bow! Though the word was meant, and we do not doubt that under jest you are making a valiant offer. But one beyond your strength, Bilbo. You cannot take this thing back. It has passed on. If you need my advice any longer, I should say that your part is ended, unless as a recorder. Finish your book, and leave the ending unaltered! There is still hope for it. But get ready to write a sequel, when they come back.'
Bilbo	't suppose I have the strength or luck left to deal with the Ring. It has grown, and I have not. But tell me: what do you mean by they?'
Elrond	' he said, `
Elrond	`You at least shall go with him. It is hardly possible to separate you from him, even when he is summoned to a secret council and you are not.'
Sam	`A nice pickle we have landed ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!'
Bilbo	's room. Merry and Pippin were indignant when they heard that Sam had crept into the Council, and had been chosen as Frodo'
Pippin	`Instead of throwing him out, and clapping him in chains, Elrond goes and rewards him for his cheek!'
Frodo	't imagine a more severe punishment. You are not thinking what you are saying: condemned to go on this hopeless journey, a reward? Yesterday I dreamed that my task was done, and I could rest here, a long while, perhaps for good.'
Merry	'and I wish you could. But we are envying Sam, not you. If you have to go, then it will be a punishment for any of us to be left behind, even in Rivendell. We have come a long way with you and been through some stiff times. We want to go on.'
Pippin	`We hobbits ought to stick together, and we will. I shall go, unless they chain me up. There must be someone with intelligence in the party.'
Peregrin	`But you are all worrying yourselves unnecessarily. Nothing is decided yet.'
Pippin	'Then what were you all doing? You were shut up for hours.'
Legolas	's bit of news about Gollum caught even him on the hop, though he passed it off.'
Gandalf	'You were inattentive. I had already heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, the only real eye-openers, as you put it, were you and Frodo; and I was the only one that was not surprised.'
Bilbo	'nothing was decided beyond choosing poor Frodo and Sam. I was afraid all the time that it might come to that, if I was let off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair number, when the reports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf?'
Elrond	's sons. We shall have to scour the lands all round for many long leagues before any move is made. So cheer up, Frodo! You will probably make quite a long stay here.'
Sam	'll just wait long enough for winter to come.'
Bilbo	't wait now fill spring; and you can'
Gandalf	't start until we have found out about the Riders.'
Gandalf	`The power of their master is in them, and they stand or fall by him. We hope that they were all unhorsed and unmasked, and so made for a while less dangerous; but we must find out for certain. In the meantime you should try and forget your troubles, Frodo. I do not know if I can do anything to help you; but I will whisper this in your ears. Someone said that intelligence would be needed in the party. He was right. I think I shall come with you.'
Gandalf	'I only said I think I shall come. Do not count on anything yet. In this matter Elrond will have much to say, and your friend the Strider. Which reminds me, I want to see Elrond. I must be off.'
Bilbo	'But quite long, I should think. We can have many a good talk. What about helping me with my book, and making a start on the next? Have you thought of an ending?'
Bilbo	`Books ought to have good endings. How would this do: and they all settled down and lived together happily ever after?'
Sam	's what I often wonder.'
Elrond	`If the Ring is to set out, it must go soon. But those who go with it must not count on their errand being aided by war or force. They must pass into the domain of the Enemy far from aid. Do you still hold to your word, Frodo, that you will be the Ring-bearer?'
Frodo	`I will go with Sam.'
Frodo	'only I thought you were going to Minas Tirith with Boromir.'
Elrond	"These I will consider. Of my household I may find some that it seems good to me to send.'
Pippin	't want to be left behind. We want to go with Frodo.'
Pippin	'Nor do any of us see clearly. It is true that if these hobbits understood the danger, they would not dare to go. But they would still wish to go, or wish that they dared, and be shamed and unhappy. I think, Elrond, that in this matter it would be well to trust rather to their friendship than to great wisdom. Even if you chose for us an elf-lord, such as Glorfindel, he could not storm the Dark Tower, nor open the road to the Fire by the power that is in him.'
Elrond	`but I am in doubt. The Shire, I forebode, is not free now from peril; and these two I had thought to send back there as messengers, to do what they could, according to the fashion of their country, to warn the people of their danger. In any case, I judge that the younger of these two, Peregrin Took, should remain. My heart is against his going.'
Master Elrond	`For otherwise I shall follow the Company.'
Elrond	'Now the tale of Nine is filled. In seven days the Company must depart.'
Michel Delving	't need it now, except to look at sometimes. You hardly feel any weight when you put it on.'
Bilbo	't tell anybody else! But I should feel happier if I knew you were wearing it. I have a fancy it would turn even the knives of the Black Riders,'
Bilbo	'But there is more about you now than appears on the surface. Good luck to you!'
Baggins	'll do my best to finish my book before you return. I should like to write the second book, if I am spared.'
Sauron	'I do not doubt that news of the discomfiture of the Riders has already reached him, and he will be filled with wrath. Soon now his spies on foot and wing will be abroad in the northern lands. Even of the sky above you must beware as you go on your way.'
Elrond	'until you stand once more on the borders of your land, and dire need is on you.'
Boromir	'But always I have let my horn cry at setting forth, and though thereafter we may walk in the shadows, I will not go forth as a thief in the night.'
Pippin	'll follow on my own.'
Bill	't to have took up with us. You could have stayed here and et the best hay till the new grass comes.'
Sam	'll warrant); flint and tinder; woollen hose: linen; various small belongings of his master'
Sam	't get it now.'
Elrond	'The Ring-bearer is setting out on the Quest of Mount Doom. On him alone is any charge laid: neither to cast away the Ring, nor to deliver it to any servant of the Enemy nor indeed to let any handle it, save members of the Company and the Council, and only then in gravest need. The others go with him as free companions, to help him on his way. You may tarry, or come back, or turn aside into other paths, as chance allows. The further you go, the less easy will it be to withdraw; yet no oath or bond is laid on you to go further than you will. For you do not yet know the strength of your hearts, and you cannot foresee what each may meet upon the road.'
Elrond	`but let him not vow to walk in the dark, who has not seen the nightfall.'
Elrond	`Look not too far ahead! But go now with good hearts! Farewell, and may the blessing of Elves and Men and all Free Folk go with you. May the stars shine upon your faces!'
Bilbo	't be too long! Farewell!'
Gandalf	`We have reached the borders of the country that Men call Hollin; many Elves lived here in happier days, when Eregion was its name. Five-and-forty leagues as the crow flies we have come, though many long miles further our feet have walked. The land and the weather will be milder now, but perhaps all the more dangerous.'
Pippin	`We must have turned eastwards in the night.'
Elrond	's house, but I suppose you never thought to look at them?'
Pippin	't remember them. Frodo has a better head for that sort of thing.'
Dale	`If we climb the pass that is called the Redhorn Gate, under the far side of Caradhras, we shall come down by the Dimrill Stair into the deep vale of the Dwarves. There lies the Mirrormere, and there the River Silverlode rises in its icy springs.'
Gimli	`and cold are the springs of Kibil-nâla. My heart trembles at the thought that I may see them soon.'
Gandalf	'But whatever you may do, we at least cannot stay in that valley. We must go down the Silverlode into the secret woods, and so to the Great River, and then -'
Gandalf	'We cannot look too far ahead. Let us be glad that the first stage is safely over. I think we will rest here, not only today but tonight as well. There is a wholesome air about Hollin. Much evil must befall a country before it wholly forgets the Elves, if once they dwelt there.'
Legolas	`But the Elves of this land were of a race strange to us of the silvan folk, and the trees and the grass do not now remember them: Only I hear the stones lament them: deep they delved us, fair they wrought us, high they builded us; but they are gone. They are gone. They sought the Havens long ago.'
Merry	'What are you looking for? Do you miss the East Wind?'
Gandalf	`Is there more in it than surprise at seeing four hobbits, not to mention the rest of us, where people are so seldom seen or heard?'
Gandalf	'If you bring a Ranger with you, it is well to pay attention to him, especially if the Ranger is Aragorn. We must stop talking aloud, rest quietly, and set the watch.'
Sam	's turn that day to take the first watch, but Aragorn joined him. The others fell asleep. Then the silence grew until even Sam felt it. The breathing of the sleepers could be plainly heard. The swish of the pony'
Strider	't look like a cloud,'
Grey	`and they have passed over Hollin. They are not natives here; they are crebain out of Fangorn and Dunland. I do not know what they are about: possibly there is some trouble away south from which they are fleeing; but I think they are spying out the land. I have also glimpsed many hawks flying high up in the sky. I think we ought to move again this evening. Hollin is no longer wholesome for us: it is being watched.'
Gandalf	`and how we can get over that without being seen, I cannot imagine. But we will think of that when we must. As for moving as soon as it is dark, I am afraid that you are right.'
Pippin	'All because of a pack of crows! I had looked forward to a real good meal tonight: something hot.'
Gandalf	`There may be many unexpected feasts ahead for you. For myself I should like a pipe to smoke in comfort, and warmer feet. However, we are certain of one thing at any rate: it will get warmer as we get south.'
Sam	' Maps conveyed nothing to Sam'
Gandalf	`And perils known and unknown will grow as we go on. But we must go on; and it is no good our delaying the passage of the mountains. Further south there are no passes, till one comes to the Gap of Rohan. I do not trust that way since your news of Saruman. Who knows which side now the marshals of the Horse-lords serve?'
Gandalf	`But there is another way, and not by the pass of Caradhras: the dark and secret way that we have spoken of.'
Gandalf	'I fear that the Redhorn Gate may be watched; and also I have doubts of the weather that is coming up behind. Snow may come. We must go with all the speed that we can. Even so it will take us more than two marches before we reach the top of the pass. Dark will come early this evening. We must leave as soon as you can get ready.'
Boromir	'I was born under the shadow of the White Mountains and know something of journeys in the high places. We shall meet bitter cold, if no worse, before we come down on the other side. It will not help us to keep so secret that we are frozen to death. When we leave here, where there are still a few trees and bushes, each of us should carry a faggot of wood, as large as he can bear.'
Bill	't you lad?'
Gandalf	`But we must not use the wood - not unless it is a choice between fire and death.'
Sam	's falling. I wish this lot would go off to Hobbiton! Folk might welcome it there.'
Boromir	"They say in my land that he can govern the storms in the Mountains of Shadow that stand upon the borders of Mordor. He has strange powers and many allies.'
Gimli	`if he can draw snow down from the North to trouble us here three hundred leagues away.'
Boromir	`Let those call it the wind who will; there are fell voices on the air; and these stones are aimed at us.'
Caradhras	`long years ago, when rumour of Sauron had not been heard in these lands.'
Gandalf	'It is no good going on. Only a little higher, if I remember rightly, this path leaves the cliff and runs into a wide shallow trough at the bottom of a long hard slope. We should have no shelter there from snow, or stones - or anything else.'
Sam	`If this is shelter, then one wall and no roof make a house.'
Bilbo	's voice speaking. I don'
Gandalf	`It is useless to sit here until the snow goes over our heads. We must do something to save ourselves.'
Gandalf	`Just a mouthful each - for all of us. It is very precious. It is miruvor, the cordial of Imladris. Elrond gave it to me at our parting. Pass it round!'
Boromir	'The choice seems near now between fire and death, Gandalf. Doubtless we shall be hidden from all unfriendly eyes when the snow has covered us, but that will not help us.'
Gandalf	'If there are any watchers that can endure this storm, then they can see us, fire or no.'
Boromir	`and the wind is quieter.'
Caradhras	`He has more snow yet to fling at us, if we go on. The sooner we go back and down the better.'
Sun	`But I must have something to work on. I cannot burn snow.'
Boromir	`when heads are at a loss bodies must serve, as we say in my country. The strongest of us must seek a way. See! Though all is now snow-clad, our path, as we came up, turned about that shoulder of rock down yonder. It was there that the snow first began to burden us. If we could reach that point, maybe it would prove easier beyond. It is no more than a furlong off, I guess.'
Legolas	`The strongest must seek a way, say you? But I say: let a ploughman plough, but choose an otter for swimming, and for running light over grass and leaf or over snow-an Elf.'
Gandalf	`I go to find the Sun!'
Legolas	's toes.'
Gimli	'It was no ordinary storm. It is the ill will of Caradhras. He does not love Elves and Dwarves, and that drift was laid to cut off our escape.'
Boromir	`And doughty Men too, if I may say it; though lesser men with spades might have served you better. Still, we have thrust a lane through the drift; and for that all here may be grateful who cannot run as light as Elves.'
Boromir	'I am weary, but I still have some strength left, and Aragorn too. We will bear the little folk. The others no doubt will make shift to tread the path behind us. Come, Master Peregrin! I will begin with you.'
Gimli	'We are departing as quickly as we may!'
Gandalf	`Whether they are good or evil, or have nothing to do with us at all, we must go down at once. Not even on the knees of Caradhras will we wait for another night-fall!'
Gandalf	`We have no choice but to go on, or to return to Rivendell.'
Gandalf	's hand again.'
Gandalf	`I thought from the beginning, when first I considered this journey, that we should try it. But it is not a pleasant way, and I have not spoken of it to the Company before. Aragorn was against it, until the pass over the mountains had at least been tried.'
Merry	`But you had better tell us about it, and let us know the worst at once.'
Boromir	`Nor do I see the need to go there. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us journey southwards, until we come to the Gap of Rohan, where men are friendly to my people, taking the road that I followed on my way hither. Or we might pass by and cross the Isen into Langstrand and Lebennin, and so come to Gondor from the regions nigh to the sea.'
Boromir	' answered Gandalf. '
Saruman	's eyes only one stray wanderer from the South and a matter of small concern to him: his mind was busy with the pursuit of the Ring. But you return now as a member of the Ring'
Boromir	`He may watch all roads, likely and unlikely. In that case to enter Moria would be to walk into a trap, hardly better than knocking at the gates of the Dark Tower itself. The name of Moria is black.'
Moria	' answered Gandalf. `
Gandalf	'I will go and look on the halls of Durin, whatever may wait there-if you can find the doors that are shut.'
Gandalf	's head will be less easy to bewilder than Elves or Men or Hobbits. Yet it will not be the first time that I have been to Moria. I sought there long for Thráin son of Thrór after he was lost. I passed through, and I came out again alive! '
Gandalf	'Who would? But the question is: who will follow me, if I lead you there? '
Legolas	's voice surely should be heard? '
Sam	`but neither do I wish to refuse the advice of Gandalf. I beg that there should be no vote, until we have slept on it. Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the morning than in this cold gloom. How the wind howls! '
Gandalf	`It is as I said. The hunt is up! Even if we live to see the dawn, who now will wish to journey south by night with the wild wolves on his trail? '
Boromir	'The wolf that one hears is worse than the orc that one fears.'
Elrond	't ever remember feeling so wretched.'
Pippin	's belly.'
Sauron	`Gandalf is here. Fly, if you value your foul skin! I will shrivel you from tail to snout, if you come within this ring.'
Gandalf	`Draw your blades, and stand back to back!'
Pippin	't get him. That was an eye-opener, and no mistake! Nearly singed the hair off my head!'
Gandalf	`These were no ordinary wolves hunting for food in the wilderness. Let us eat quickly and go!'
Boromir	`that Gandalf will find what he seeks, or that coming to the cliff we shall find the gates lost for ever. All choices seem ill, and to be caught between wolves and the wall the likeliest chance. Lead on!'
Gandalf	`This is where the stream ran: Sirannon, the Gate-stream, they used to call it. But what has happened to the water, I cannot guess; it used to be swift and noisy. Come! We must hurry on. We are late.'
Gandalf	`But there is no mistaking the place. There is all that remains of the Stair Falls. If I remember right, there was a flight of steps cut in the rock at their side, but the main road wound away left and climbed with several loops up to the level ground at the top. There used to be a shallow valley beyond the falls right up to the Walls of Moria, and the Sirannon flowed through it with the road beside it. Let us go and see what things are like now! '
Moria	`And there the Gate stood once upon a time, the Elven Door at the end of the road from Hollin by which we have come. But this way is blocked. None of the Company, I guess, will wish to swim this gloomy water at the end of the day. It has an unwholesome look.'
Gimli	`The first thing for the Company to do is to climb up by the main path and see where that will lead us. Even if there were no lake, we could not get our baggage-pony up this stair.'
Gandalf	`The road under the mountains is a dark road, and there are places narrow and steep which he cannot tread, even if we can.'
Bill	`I had not thought of that. And poor Sam! I wonder what he will say? '
Gandalf	`Poor Bill has been a useful companion and it goes to my heart to turn him adrift now. I would have travelled lighter and brought no animal, least of all this one that Sam is fond of, if I had had my way. I feared all along that we should be obliged to take this road.'
Gandalf	'Here the Elven-way from Hollin ended. Holly was the token of the people of that land, and they planted it here to mark the end of their domain; for the West-door was made chiefly for their use in their traffic with the Lords of Moria. Those were happier days, when there was still close friendship at times between folk of different race, even between Dwarves and Elves.'
Gandalf	'and I will not give judgement now. But I beg you two, Legolas and Gimli, at least to be friends, and to help me. I need you both. The doors are shut and hidden, and the sooner we find them the better. Night is at hand! '
Bill	's flat. After he has come so far and all! '
Sam	`But when the Door opens I do not think you will be able to drag your Bill inside, into the long dark of Moria. You will have to choose between Bill and your master.'
Sam	'd be nothing short of murder to turn him loose with all these wolves about.'
Gandalf	`You are a wise beast, and have learned much in Rivendell. Make your ways to places where you can find grass, and so come in time to Elrond'
Bill	's ear. Sam burst into tears, and fumbled with the straps, unlading all the pony'
Merry	't see any sign of them.'
Gimli	`They are invisible, and their own masters cannot find them or open them, if their secret is forgotten.'
Gandalf	`Unless things are altogether changed, eyes that know what to look for may discover the signs.'
Gandalf	`They are wrought of ithildin that mirrors only starlight and moonlight, and sleeps until it is touched by one who speaks words now long forgotten in Middle-earth. It is long since I heard them, and I thought deeply before I could recall them to my mind.'
Frodo	'I thought I knew the elf-letters but I cannot read these.'
Gandalf	'But they do not say anything of importance to us. They say only: The Doors of Durin, Lord of Moria. Speak, friend, and enter. And underneath small and faint is written: I, Narvi, made them. Celebrimbor of Hollin drew these signs.'
Gimli	`If you are a friend, speak the password, and the doors will open, and you can enter.'
Gandalf	'these doors are probably governed by words. Some dwarf-gates will open only at special times, or for particular persons; and some have locks and keys that are still needed when all necessary times and words are known. These doors have no key. In the days of Durin they were not secret. They usually stood open and doorwards sat here. But if they were shut, any who knew the opening word could speak it and pass in. At least so it is recorded, is it not, Gimli? '
Boromir	`You told us that you had once passed through the Mines. How could that be, if you did not know how to enter? '
Boromir	' he added, with a glint in his eyes under their bristling brows, '
Peregrin	' said Gandalf. `
Boromir	'It seems that we shall need him still, if the wolves do not find us. How I hate this foul pool! '
Boromir	't disturb it! '
Merry	" and enter. I had only to speak the Elvish word for friend and the doors opened. Quite simple. Too simple for a learned lore-master in these suspicious days. Those were happier times. Now let us go!'
Bill	`Poor old Bill! Wolves and snakes! But the snakes were too much for him. I had to choose, Mr. Frodo. I had to come with you.'
Gandalf	`The passage is blocked behind us now and there is only one way out--on the other side of the mountains. I fear from the sounds that boulders have been piled up, and the trees uprooted and thrown across the gate. I am sorry; for the trees were beautiful, and had stood so long.'
Frodo	'What was the thing, or were there many of them? '
Gandalf	'but the arms were all guided by one purpose. Something has crept, or has been driven out of dark waters under the mountains. There are older and fouler things than Orcs in the deep places of the world.'
Boromir	`In the deep places of the world! And thither we are going against my wish. Who will lead us now in this deadly dark? '
Gandalf	'and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow my staff! '
Gandalf	'It depends on many chances. But going straight, without mishap or losing our way, we shall take three or four marches, I expect. It cannot be less than forty miles from West-door to East-gate in a direct line, and the road may wind much.'
Gandalf	`Do not be afraid! I have been with him on many a journey, if never on one so dark; and there are tales of Rivendell of greater deeds of his than any that I have seen. He will not go astray-if there is any path to find. He has led us in here against our fears, but he will lead us out again, at whatever cost to himself. He is surer of finding the way home in a blind night than the cats of Queen Berúthiel.'
Sam	't got it! '
Gandalf	`And I expect that you are all as weary as I am, or wearier. We had better halt here for what is left of the night. You know what I mean! In here it is ever dark; but outside the late Moon is riding westward and the middle-night has passed.'
Bill	't got him yet.'
Merry	`Steady! You do not know what is inside yet. I will go first.'
Merry	'Let the guide go first while you have one.'
Gimli	' use, covered with a stone lid. But the lid is broken, and we must all take care in the dark.'
Pippin	'This is a serious journey, not a hobbit walking-party. Throw yourself in next time, and then you will be no further nuisance. Now be quiet! '
Peregrin	's foolish stone; but probably something has been disturbed that would have been better left quiet. Pray, do nothing of the kind again! Let us hope we shall get some rest without further trouble. You, Pippin, can go on the first watch, as a reward,'
Gandalf	`I do not like the feel of the middle way; and I do not like the smell of the left-hand way: there is foul air down there, or I am no guide. I shall take the right-hand passage. It is time we began to climb up again.'
Gandalf	`At last we are coming to the habitable parts, and I guess that we are not far now from the eastern side. But we are high up, a good deal higher than the Dimrill Gate, unless I am mistaken. From the feeling of the air we must be in a wide hall. I will now risk a little real light.'
Gandalf	'There used to be great windows on the mountain-side, and shafts leading out to the light in the upper reaches of the Mines. I think we have reached them now, but it is night outside again, and we cannot tell until morning. If I am right, tomorrow we may actually see the morning peeping in. But in the meanwhile we had better go no further. Let us rest, if we can. Things have gone well so far, and the greater part of the dark road is over. But we are not through yet, and it is a long way down to the Gates that open on the world.'
Sam	't live in these darksome holes surely? '
Gimli	`This is the great realm and city of the Dwarrowdelf. And of old it was not darksome, but full of light and splendour, as is still remembered in our songs.'
Sam	`I should like to learn it. In Moria, in Khazad-dûm! But it makes the darkness seem heavier, thinking of all those lamps. Are there piles of jewels and gold lying about here still? '
Gandalf	`No. The Orcs have often plundered Moria; there is nothing left in the upper halls. And since the dwarves fled, no one dares to seek the shafts and treasuries down in the deep places: they are drowned in water--or in a shadow of fear.'
Gandalf	`The wealth of Moria was not in gold and jewels, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron, their servant. Such things they found here, it is true, especially iron; but they did not need to delve for them: all things that they desired they could obtain in traffic. For here alone in the world was found Moria-silver, or true-silver as some have called it: mithril is the Elvish name. The Dwarves have a name which they do not tell. Its worth was ten times that of gold, and now it is beyond price; for little is left above ground, and even the Orcs dare not delve here for it. The lodes lead away north towards Caradhras, and down to darkness. The Dwarves tell no tale; but even as mithril was the foundation of their wealth, so also it was their destruction: they delved too greedily and too deep, and disturbed that from which they fled, Durin'
Gimli	`A corslet of Moria-silver? That was a kingly gift! '
Gandalf	`I never told him, but its worth was greater than the value of the whole Shire and everything in it.'
Gandalf	`For morning it is again at last. I was right, you see. We are high up on the east side of Moria. Before today is over we ought to find the Great Gates and see the waters of Mirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us.'
Gimli	`I have looked on Moria, and it is very great, but it has become dark and dreadful; and we have found no sign of my kindred. I doubt now that Balin ever came here.'
Gandalf	`I think that none of us will wish to spend another night in Moria.'
Boromir	`Which way shall we take? Yonder eastward arch? '
Gandalf	`But I do not know yet exactly where we are. Unless I am quite astray, I guess that we are above and to the north of the Great Gates; and it may not be easy to find the right road down to them. The eastern arch will probably prove to be the way that we must take; but before we make up our minds we ought to look about us. Let us go towards that light in the north door. If we could find a window it would help, but I fear that the light comes only down deep shafts.'
Moria	' said Gandalf. '
Frodo	`I feared it was so.'
Balin	' he said. `
Gimli	`I guess that is where we now stand.'
Gandalf	's Axe and something helm. Then Balin is now lord of Moria. That seems to end a chapter. After some stars another hand begins, and I can see we found truesilver, and later the word wellforged and then something, I have it! mithril; and the last two lines Óin to seek for the upper armouries of Third Deep, something go westwards, a blur, to Hollin gate.'
Gandalf	`but I can make little of them in this light. Now there must be a number of leaves missing, because they begin to be numbered five, the fifth year of the colony, I suppose. Let me see! No, they are too cut and stained; I cannot read them. We might do better in the sunlight. Wait! Here is something: a large bold hand using an Elvish script.'
Ori	`He could write well and speedily, and often used the Elvish characters.'
Gandalf	'The first clear word is sorrow, but the rest of the line is lost, unless it ends in estre. Yes, it must be yestre followed by day being the tenth of novembre Balin lord of Moria fell in Dimrill Dale. He went alone to look in Mirror mere. an orc shot him from behind a stone. we slew the orc, hut many more ... up from east up the Silverlode. The remainder of the page is so blurred that I can hardly make anything out, but I think I can read we have barred the gates, and then can hold them long if, and then perhaps horrible and suffer. Poor Balin! He seems to have kept the title that he took for less than five years. I wonder what happened afterwards; but there is no time to puzzle out the last few pages. Here is the last page of all.'
Gimli	'It was well for us that the pool had sunk a little, and that the Watcher was sleeping down at the southern end.'
Gandalf	'but there were not many left by that time. So ended the attempt to retake Moria! It was valiant but foolish. The time is not come yet. Now, I fear, we must say farewell to Balin son of Fundin. Here he must lie in the halls of his fathers. We will take this book, the Book of Mazarbul, and look at it more closely later. You had better keep it, Gimli, and take it back to Dáin, if you get a chance. It will interest him, though it will grieve him deeply. Come, let us go! The morning is passing.'
Gandalf	'But our visit to this room has not been in vain. I now know where we are. This must be, as Gimli says, the Chamber of Mazarbul; and the hall must be the twenty-first of the North-end. Therefore we should leave by the eastern arch of the hall, and bear right and south, and go downwards. The Twenty-first Hall should be on the Seventh Level, that is six above the level of the Gates. Come now! Back to the hall! '
Gandalf	`Why did I delay? Here we are, caught, just as they were before. But I was not here then. We will see what ----'
Gandalf	'We must not get shut in. Keep the east door ajar! We will go that way, if we get a chance.'
Shire	' he cried, and springing beside Boromir, he stooped, and stabbed with Sting at the hideous foot. There was a bellow, and the foot jerked back, nearly wrenching Sting from Frodo'
Shire	's bite is deep! You have a good blade, Frodo son of Drogo! '
Gandalf	`Let us go, before the troll returns!'
Merry	's sword and bore him backwards, throwing him to the ground. Diving under Aragorn'
Gandalf	'Now is the last chance. Run for it! '
Frodo	`I can walk. Put me down! '
Gandalf	'But there is time for wonder. Off you go, all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes for me at the bottom, but if I do not come soon, go on! Go quickly and choose paths leading right and downwards.'
Gandalf	`Swords are no more use here. Go!'
Gimli	`Did you meet the beater of the drums? '
Frodo	'I am alive, and whole I think. I am bruised and in pain, but it is not too bad.'
Frodo	`though I feel as if I had been caught between a hammer and an anvil.'
Bilbo	`There is more about you than meets the eye, as I said of him long ago.'
Gimli	`that there is a light ahead. But it is not daylight. It is red. What can it be? '
Gandalf	`I wonder if that is what they meant: that the lower levels are on fire? Still, we can only go on.'
Gandalf	`Let us hope that the fire now lies between us and pursuit. Come! There is no time to lose.'
Gandalf	'If the sun is shining outside we may still escape. After me! '
Boromir	`The fire has cut them off. We are on the wrong side! '
Gandalf	`The Bridge is near. It is dangerous and narrow.'
Gimli	'Pippin and Merry next. Straight on and up the stair beyond the door! '
Legolas	'A Balrog! A Balrog is come! '
Gimli	's Bane! '
Gandalf	`What an evil fortune! And I am already weary.'
Gandalf	' Aragorn and Boromir did not heed the command, but still held their ground, side by side, behind Gandalf at the far end of the bridge. The others halted just within the doorway at the hall'
Elendil	'I am with you, Gandalf! '
Gandalf	'Did I not say to you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware? Alas that I spoke true! What hope have we without you? '
Caradhras	`There he stands smiling in the sun! '
Gimli	" Now long shall I journey ere I have joy again. It is I that must hasten away, and he that must remain.'
Gimli	`I cannot pass without turning aside for a moment to look at the wonder of the dale! '
Gates	`The Sun sinks early. The Orcs will not, maybe, come out till after dusk, but we must be far away before nightfall. The Moon is almost spent, and it will be dark tonight.'
Frodo	`I would not have you go without seeing Kheled-zâram.'
Gimli	'Let us look ourselves once, ere we go!'
Gimli	`There lies the Crown of Durin till he wakes. Farewell! '
Silverlode	`Do not drink of it! It is icy cold.'
Legolas	`That is the fairest of all the dwellings of my people. There are no trees like the trees of that land. For in the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn to gold. Not till the spring comes and the new green opens do they fall, and then the boughs are laden with yellow flowers; and the floor of the wood is golden, and golden is the roof, and its pillars are of silver, for the bark of the trees is smooth and grey. So still our songs in Mirkwood say. My heart would be glad if I were beneath the eaves of that wood, and it were springtime! '
Frodo	`So much has happened this day and we have such need of haste, that I have forgotten that you were hurt; and Sam too. You should have spoken. We have done nothing to ease you, as we ought, though all the orcs of Moria were after us. Come now! A little further on there is a place where we can rest for a little. There I will do what I can for you. Come, Boromir! We will carry them.'
Sam	's wound was not deep, but it looked ugly, and Aragorn'
Sam	'Many have received worse than this in payment for the slaying of their first orc. The cut is not poisoned, as the wounds of orc-blades too often are. It should heal well when I have tended it. Bathe it when Gimli has heated water.'
Frodo	`All I needed was some food and a little rest.'
Gimli	`It is a mithril-coat. Mithril! I have never seen or heard tell of one so fair. Is this the coat that Gandalf spoke of? Then he undervalued it. But it was well given! '
Merry	'Bless the old hobbit! I love him more than ever. I hope we get a chance of telling him about it! '
Frodo	's right side and breast. Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one point the rings had been driven through it into the flesh. Frodo'
Frodo	'I thought I heard feet, and I thought I saw a light-like eyes. I have thought so often, since we first entered Moria.'
Gimli	'Come! Let us hurry! The others are out of sight.'
Legolas	'Lothlórien! We have come to the eaves of the Golden Wood. Alas that it is winter! '
Lothlórien	'Glad I am to hear again the wind in the trees! We are still little more than five leagues from the Gates, but we can go no further. Here let us hope that the virtue of the Elves will keep us tonight from the peril that comes behind.'
Legolas	'but we hear that Lórien is not yet deserted, for there is a secret power here that holds evil from the land. Nevertheless its folk are seldom seen, and maybe they dwell now deep in the woods and far from the northern border.'
Boromir	'Is there no other way? '
Boromir	`By strange paths has this Company been led, and so far to evil fortune. Against my will we passed under the shades of Moria, to our loss. And now we must enter the Golden Wood, you say. But of that perilous land we have heard in Gondor, and it is said that few come out who once go in; and of that few none have escaped unscathed.'
Boromir	`But it is perilous.'
Nimrodel	'Of this stream the Silvan Elves made many songs long ago, and still we sing them in the North, remembering the rainbow on its falls, and the golden flowers that floated in its foam. All is dark now and the Bridge of Nimrodel is broken down. I will bathe my feet, for it is said that the water is healing to the weary.'
Nimrodel	'I will sing you a song of the maiden Nimrodel, who bore the same name as the stream beside which she lived lung ago. It is a fair song in our woodland tongue; but this is how it runs in the Westron Speech, as some in Rivendell now sing it.'
Legolas	'That is but a part, for I have forgotten much. It is long and sad, for it tells how sorrow came upon Lothlórien, Lórien of the Blossom, when the Dwarves awakened evil in the mountains.'
Legolas	`Then many of the Elves of Nimrodel'
Gimli	`We cannot build a house, but tonight we will do as the Galadhrim and seek refuge in the tree-tops, if we can. We have sat here beside the road already longer than was wise.'
Legolas	`I am at home among trees, by root or bough, though these trees are of a kind strange to me, save as a name in song. Mellyrn they are called, and are those that bear the yellow blossom, but I have never climbed in one. I will see now what is their shape and way of growth.'
Pippin	`they will be marvellous trees indeed if they can offer any rest at night, except to birds. I cannot sleep on a perch! '
Legolas	`if that is more after the fashion of your kind. But you must dig swift and deep, if you wish to hide from Orcs.'
Sam	't you hear their voices? '
Legolas	'But they say also that you need have no fear. They have been aware of us for a long while. They heard my voice across the Nimrodel, and knew that I was one of their Northern kindred, and therefore they did not hinder our crossing; and afterwards they heard my song. Now they bid me climb up with Frodo; for they seem to have had some tidings of him and of our journey. The others they ask to wait a little and to keep watch at the foot of the tree, until they have decided what is to be done.'
Legolas	's face, and Sam'
Legolas	`Myself, four hobbits; and two men, one of whom, Aragorn, is an Elf-friend of the folk of Westernesse.'
Lórien	`and he has the favour of the Lady. All then is well. But you have yet spoken only of seven.'
Haldir	`That is not well. We have not had dealings with the Dwarves since the Dark Days. They are not permitted in our land. I cannot allow him to pass.'
Dáin	`Elrond himself chose him to be one of our companions, and he has been brave and faithful.'
Legolas	' said Haldir at last. `
Merry	`We have lugged up your blankets as well as our own. Strider has hidden all the rest of the baggage in a deep drift of leaves.'
Haldir	`It is cold in the tree-tops in winter, though the wind tonight is in the South; but we have food and drink to give you that will drive away the night-chill, and we have skins and cloaks to spare.'
Pippin	't roll off,'
Sam	'll drop off, if you take my meaning.'
Frodo	`What are they doing? '
Haldir	' he said. `
Nimrodel	`Farewell,'
Haldir	'and it runs both swift and deep, and is very cold. We do not set foot in it so far north, unless we must. But in these days of watchfulness we do not make bridges. This is how we cross! Follow me!'
Legolas	`but the others have not this skill. Must they swim?'
Haldir	`We have two more ropes. We will fasten them above the other, one shoulder-high, and another half-high, and holding these the strangers should be able to cross with care.'
Gimli	`I will not walk blindfold, like a beggar or a prisoner. And I am no spy. My folk have never had dealings with any of the servants of the Enemy. Neither have we done harm to the Elves. I am no more likely to betray you than Legolas, or any other of my companions.'
Haldir	'Yet this is our law. I am not the master of the law, and cannot set it aside. I have done much in letting you set foot over Celebrant.'
Gimli	'or I will go back and seek my own land, where I am known to be true of word, though I perish alone in the wilderness.'
Haldir	'Now you have come thus far, you must be brought before the Lord and the Lady. They shall judge you, to hold you or to give you leave, as they will. You cannot cross the rivers again, and behind you there are now secret sentinels that you cannot pass. You would be slain before you saw them.'
Haldir	'A plague on Dwarves and their stiff necks! '
Gimli	`A merry troop of fools we shall look! Will Haldir lead us all on a string, like many blind beggars with one dog? But I will be content, if only Legolas here shares my blindness.'
Haldir	`I shall lead you well, and the paths are smooth and straight.'
Legolas	'Here all are enemies of the one Enemy, and yet I must walk blind, while the sun is merry in the woodland under leaves of gold! '
Sauron	's creatures; and it is rumoured that we cannot now safely pass southward through Rohan, and the mouths of the Great River are watched by the Enemy. Even if we could come to the shores of the Sea, we should find no longer any shelter there. It is said that there are still havens of. the High Elves, but they are far north and west, beyond the land of the Halflings. But where that may be, though the Lord and Lady may know, I do not.'
Merry	`There are Elf-havens west of my land, the Shire where Hobbits live.'
Hobbit	'It is long indeed since any of my folk have looked on it, yet still we remember it in song. Tell me of these havens as we walk.'
Merry	't think I should have had the heart to leave it.'
Lothlórien	' said Haldir. '
Haldir	`they bring me a message from the Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim. You are all to walk free, even the dwarf Gimli. It seems that the Lady knows who and what is each member of your Company. New messages have come from Rivendell perhaps.'
Nai	's Day! '
Cerin Amroth	`For this is the heart of the ancient realm as it was long ago, and here is the mound of Amroth, where in happier days his high house was built. Here ever bloom the winter flowers in the unfading grass: the yellow elanor, and the pale niphredil. Here we will stay awhile, and come to the city of the Galadhrim at dusk.'
Sam	`I thought that Elves were all for moon and stars: but this is more elvish than anything I ever heard tell of. I feel as if I was inside a song. if you take my meaning.'
Haldir	`Would it please you to climb with me up Cerin Amroth? '
Haldir	`Look this way first! '
Mirkwood	`It is clad in a forest of dark fir, where the trees strive one against another and their branches rot and wither. In the midst upon a stony height stands Dol Guldur, where long the hidden Enemy had his dwelling. We fear that now it is inhabited again, and with power sevenfold. A black cloud lies often over it of late. In this high place you may see the two powers that are opposed one to another; and ever they strive now in thought, but whereas the light perceives the very heart of the darkness, its own secret has not been discovered. Not yet.'
Caras Galadhon	'Here is the city of the Galadhrim where dwell the Lord Celeborn and Galadriel the Lady of Lórien. But we cannot enter here, for the gates do not look northward. We must go round to the southern side, and the way is not short, for the city is great.'
Celeborn	`It is their wish that you should ascend and speak with them.'
Elf	'Let Frodo come next and with him Legolas. The others may follow as they wish. It is a long climb for those that are not accustomed to such stairs, but you may rest upon the way.'
Celeborn	`When all have come we will speak together.'
Glóin	's folk in Caras Galadhon. But today we have broken our long law. May it be a sign that though the world is now dark better days are at hand, and that friendship shall be renewed between our peoples.'
Lady Galadriel	`Gandalf the Grey set out with the Company, but he did not pass the borders of this land. Now tell us where he is; for I much desired to speak with him again. But I cannot see him from afar, unless he comes within the fences of Lothlórien: a grey mist is about him, and the ways of his feet and of his mind are hidden from me.'
Celeborn	`Why has nothing of this been told to me before? '
Legolas	`At first we were weary and danger was too close behind and afterwards we almost forgot our grief for a time, as we walked in gladness on the fair paths of Lórien.'
Frodo	'Gandalf was our guide, and he led us through Moria; and when our escape seemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.'
Balin	`It was both a shadow and a flame, strong and terrible.'
Legolas	`of all elf-banes the most deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.'
Celeborn	`We long have feared that under Caradhras a terror slept. But had I known that the Dwarves had stirred up this evil in Moria again, l would have forbidden you to pass the northern borders, you and all that went with you. And if it were possible, one would say that at the last Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going needlessly into the net of Moria.'
Celeborn	`Let Gimli forget my harsh words: I spoke in the trouble of my heart. I will do what I can to aid you, each according to his wish and need, but especially that one of the little folk who bears the burden.'
Lady Galadriel	'Tonight you shall sleep in peace.'
Celeborn	`You are worn with sorrow and much toil. Even if your Quest did not concern us closely, you should have refuge in this City, until you were healed and refreshed. Now you shall rest, and we will not speak of your further road for a while.'
Pippin	`You soon broke down. Anyone would have thought you had a guilty conscience. I hope it was nothing worse than a wicked plot to steal one of my blankets.'
Sam	't like it. She seemed to be looking inside me and asking me what I would do if she gave me the chance of flying back home to the Shire to a nice little hole with-with a bit of garden of my own.'
Merry	'll say any more,'
Gimli	`that my choice would remain secret and known only to myself.'
Boromir	`Maybe it was only a test, and she thought to read our thoughts for her own good purpose; but almost I should have said that she was tempting us, and offering what she pretended to have the power to give. It need not be said that I refused to listen. The Men of Minas Tirith are true to their word.'
Boromir	`She held you long in her gaze, Ring-bearer,'
Frodo	`but whatever came into my mind then I will keep there.'
Boromir	`I do not feel too sure of this Elvish Lady and her purposes.'
Lady Galadriel	'You know not what you say. There is in her and in this land no evil, unless a man bring it hither himself. Then let him beware! But tonight I shall sleep without fear for the first time since I left Rivendell. And may I sleep deep, and forget for a while my grief! I am weary in body and in heart.'
Frodo	'But that is the best I can do yet.'
Frodo	' said Sam. `
Bilbo	't bear to think of bringing the news to him.'
Sam	`I asked you the same question once before-it seems a very long while ago; but you have seen more of them since then.'
Hobbit	't lay my hands on it, in a manner of speaking.'
Sam	'd dearly love to see some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo! '
Gandalf	's fireworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick temper, and his voice.'
Sam	've got to go on, then we'
Gandalf	'm thinking.'
Sam	`Yet I hope very much that before we leave we shall see the Lady of the Elves again.'
Galadriel	'I have brought you here so that you may look in it, if you will.'
Elf	'What shall we look for, and what shall we see? '
Sam	'For this is what your folk would call magic. I believe; though I do not understand clearly what they mean; and they seem also to use the same word of the deceits of the Enemy. But this, if you will, is the magic of Galadriel. Did you not say that you wished to see Elf-magic? '
Sam	're willing.'
Frodo	't understand.'
Sandyman	'd fell him!'
Merry	's the poor old gaffer going down the Hill with his bits of things on a barrow. I must go home! '
Sam	's going to catch it hot! '
Lady Galadriel	`You did not wish to see Elf-magic and were content.'
Gandalf	's view. Doubt came into Frodo'
Frodo	`And what do you wish? '
Lady Galadriel	`I will give you the One Ring, if you ask for it. It is too great a matter for me.'
Lady Galadriel	' she said, `
Frodo	`a thing which I often meant to ask Gandalf in Rivendell. I am permitted to wear the One Ring: why cannot I see all the others and know the thoughts of those that wear them? '
Boromir	`my way home lies onward and not back.'
Celeborn	`but is all this Company going with you to Minas Tirith? '
Boromir	`But I am not the leader of the Company.'
Celeborn	`It is not my part to choose for you; but I will help you as I may. There are some among you who can handle boats: Legolas, whose folk know the swift Forest River; and Boromir of Gondor; and Aragorn the traveller.'
Merry	`Not all of us look on boats as wild horses. My people live by the banks of the Brandywine.'
Celeborn	`Then I will furnish your Company with boats. They must be small and light, for if you go far by water, there are places where you will be forced to carry them. You will come to the rapids of Sarn Gebir, and maybe at last to the great falls of Rauros where the River thunders down from Nen Hithoel; and there are other perils. Boats may make your journey less toilsome for a while. Yet they will not give you counsel: in the end you must leave them and the River, and turn west-or east.'
Celeborn	'I will send my people to you in the morning to help you make ready for the journey. Now we will wish you all a fair night and untroubled sleep.'
Galadriel	'Sleep in peace! Do not trouble your hearts overmuch with thought of the road tonight. Maybe the paths that you each shall tread are already laid before your feet, though you do not see them. Good night! '
Boromir	`It is a choice between defending a strong place and walking openly into the arms of death. At least, that is how I see it.'
Boromir	's thought was different from his final words. It would be folly to throw away: what? The Ring of Power? He had said something like this at the Council, but then he had accepted the correction of Elrond. Frodo looked at Aragorn, but he seemed deep in his own thought and made no sign that he had heeded Boromir'
Gimli	'Why it is better than the honey-cakes of the Beornings, and that is great praise, for the Beornings are the best bakers that I know of; but they are none too willing to deal out their cakes to travellers in these days. You are kindly hosts! '
Elf	`and I am sent now to be your guide again. The Dimrill Dale is full of vapour and clouds of smoke, and the mountains are troubled. There are noises in the deeps of the earth. If any of you had thought of returning northwards to your homes, you would not have been able to pass that way. But come! Your path now goes south.'
Elf	'Never travel far without a rope! And one that is long and strong and light. Such are these. They may be a help in many needs.'
Sam	's in the family as you might say.'
Elf	`but there is no time now to instruct you in the art of their making. Had we known that this craft delighted you, we could have taught you much. But now alas! unless you should at some time return hither, you must be content with our gift. May it serve you well! '
Haldir	`All is now ready for you. Enter the boats! But take care at first! '
Celeborn	`you have not yet eaten with us, and we bid you, therefore, to a parting feast, here between the flowing waters that will bear you far from Lórien.'
Boromir	`But what I have heard seems to me for the most part old wives'
Celeborn	'But do not despise the lore that has come down from distant years; for oft it may chance that old wives keep in memory word of things that once were needful for the wise to know.'
Galadriel	`This stone I gave to Celebrían my daughter, and she to hers; and now it comes to you as a token of hope. In this hour take the name that was foretold for you, Elessar, the Elfstone of the house of Elendil! '
Sam	`but also it may stand for garden in your tongue. In this box there is earth from my orchard, and such blessing as Galadriel has still to bestow is upon it. It will not keep you on your road, nor defend you against any peril; but if you keep it and see your home again at last, then perhaps it may reward you. Though you should find all barren and laid waste, there will be few gardens in Middle-earth that will bloom like your garden, if you sprinkle this earth there. Then you may remember Galadriel, and catch a glimpse far off of Lórien, that you have seen only in our winter. For our spring and our summer are gone by, and they will never be seen on earth again save in memory.'
Gimli	`It is enough for me to have seen the Lady of the Galadhrim, and to have heard her gentle words.'
Lady Galadriel	`Nothing, unless it might be - unless it is permitted to ask, nay, to name a single strand of your hair, which surpasses the gold of the earth as the stars surpass the gems of the mine. I do not ask for such a gift. But you commanded me to name my desire.'
Celeborn	`yet that is not true of Gimli. For none have ever made to me a request so bold and yet so courteous. And how shall I refuse, since I commanded him to speak? But tell me, what would you do with such a gift? '
Gimli	' she said. `
Eärendil	's star, set amid the waters of my fountain. It will shine still brighter when night is about you. May it be a light to you in dark places, when all other lights go out. Remember Galadriel and her Mirror! '
Legolas	`Henceforward I will call nothing fair, unless it be her gift.'
Legolas	`Alas for us all! And for all that walk the world in these after-days. For such is the way of it: to find and lose, as it seems to those whose boat is on the running stream. But I count you blessed, Gimli son of Glóin: for your loss you suffer of your own free will, and you might have chosen otherwise. But you have not forsaken your companions, and the least reward that you shall have is that the memory of Lothlórien shall remain ever clear and unstained in your heart, and shall neither fade nor grow stale.'
Sam	`And mighty big ones too! '
Frodo	`I always imagined that as one journeyed south it got warmer and merrier, until winter was left behind for ever.'
Legolas	's gift. Merry and Pippin in the middle boat were ill at ease, for Boromir sat muttering to himself, sometimes biting his nails, as if some restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimes seizing a paddle and driving the boat close behind Aragorn'
Sam	't a dream. Funny it was anyway.'
Sam	't seen or thought of anything to make me smile since we left Lothlórien.'
Frodo	't a dream. And you had best hear it. It was like this: I saw a log with eyes! '
Frodo	`There are many in the River. But leave out the eyes! '
Sam	't a log, for it had paddle-feet, like a swan'
Gimli	't there. Yet I think I caught a glimpse with the tail of-my eye, as the saying is, of something dark shooting under the shadow of the bank. I couldn'
Gamgee	'm not so sure. What do you make of it, Mr. Frodo? '
Sam	't. I saw them away back north before we reached Lórien. And I saw a strange creature with eyes climbing to the flet that night. Haldir saw it too. And do you remember the report of the Elves that went after the orc-band? '
Bilbo	's stories and all, I fancy I could put a name on the creature, at a guess. A nasty name. Gollum, maybe? '
Frodo	`Ever since the night on the flet. I suppose he was lurking in Moria, and picked up our trail then; but I hoped that our stay in Lórien would throw him off the scent again. The miserable creature must have been hiding in the woods by the Silverlode, watching us start off! '
Sam	'll keep watch. I can sleep tomorrow, being no more than luggage in a boat, as you might say.'
Frodo	". You shall watch; but only if you promise to wake me halfway towards morning, if nothing happens before then.'
Sam	's nothing to tell, or not much. I thought I heard some soft plashing and a sniffing noise, a while back; but you hear a lot of such queer sounds by a river at night.'
Frodo	`I felt something in my sleep. Why have you drawn your sword? '
Frodo	'Or at least, so I guess.'
Legolas	'Is it, as I think. an eagle? '
Legolas	`It is an eagle, a hunting eagle. I wonder what that forebodes. It is far from the mountains.'
Boromir	`This is madness! We cannot dare the Rapids by night! But no boat can live in Sarn Gebir, be it night or day.'
Frodo	'I did not know that we had come so far: Anduin flows faster than I thought. Sarn Gebir must be close at hand already.'
Boromir	'Paddle! Or we shall be driven on the shoals.'
Frodo	's hood; and a third stood fast in the gunwale of the second boat, close by Merry'
Sam	`And a nice place to choose, too. The River seems set on taking us right into their arms! '
Legolas	'That was a mighty shot in the dark, my friend!'
Gimli	`But I am glad that the shadow came no nearer. I liked it not at all. Too much it reminded me of the shadow in Moria - the shadow of the Balrog,'
Frodo	'It was something colder. I think it was -'
Frodo	`Whatever it was, its fall has dismayed our enemies.'
Wilderland	'll remember, Mr. Frodo, the Moon was waning as we lay on the flet up in that tree: a week from the full, I reckon. And we'
Silverlode	't remember any moon, either new or old, in Caras Galadhon: only stars by night and sun by day.'
Legolas	`but change and growth is not in all things and places alike. For the Elves the world moves, and it moves both very swift and very slow. Swift, because they themselves change little, and all else fleets by: it is a grief to them. Slow, because they do not count the running years, not for themselves. The passing seasons are but ripples ever repeated in the long long stream. Yet beneath the Sun all things must wear to an end at last.'
Lórien	`The power of the Lady is on it. Rich are the hours, though short they seem, in Caras Galadhon, where Galadriel wields the Elven-ring.'
Lórien	`Speak no more of it! But so it is, Sam: in that land you lost your count. There time flowed swiftly by us, as for the Elves. The old moon passed, and a new moon waxed and waned in the world outside, while we tarried there. And yestereve a new moon came again. Winter is nearly gone. Time flows on to a spring of little hope.'
Sam	`but this seems to be a lucky one. Now perhaps we can get away without those cursed goblins seeing us.'
Boromir	`If the Emyn Muil lie before us, then we can abandon these cockle-boats, and strike westward and southward, until we come to the Entwash and cross into my own land.'
Boromir	`And even if you pass the Gates of Argonath and come unmolested to the Tindrock, what will you do then? Leap down the Falls and land in the marshes? '
Boromir	`and you will need my strength, if ever you are to reach the Tindrock. To the tall isle I will go, but no further. There I shall turn to my home, alone if my help has not earned the reward of any companionship.'
Boromir	`If you go forward, peril will grow with every mile, even if you find a path.'
Gimli	`The legs of Men will lag on a rough road, while a Dwarf goes on, be the burden twice his own weight, Master Boromir! '
Boromir	`We need sleep, and even if Aragorn had a mind to pass the Gates of Argonath by night, we are all too tired-except, no doubt, our sturdy dwarf.'
Argonath	`We shall pass them soon. Keep the boats in line, and as far apart as you can! Hold the middle of the stream! '
Sam	'll never wet my toes in a puddle again, let alone a river! '
Isildur	's son heir of Elendil, has nought to dread! '
Tol Brandir	'Upon the left stands Amon Lhaw, and upon the right is Amon Hen the Hills of Hearing and of Sight. In the days of the great kings there were high seats upon them, and watch was kept there. But it is said that no foot of man or beast has ever been set upon Tol Brandir. Ere the shade of night falls we shall come to them. I hear the endless voice of Rauros calling.'
Frodo	`It is not your watch.'
Frodo	`Are enemies at hand? '
Frodo	`Not very near, and yet too near, it seems.'
Frodo	`I fear that the burden is laid upon you. You are the Bearer appointed by the Council. Your own way you alone can choose. In this matter I cannot advise you. I am not Gandalf, and though I have tried to bear his part, I do not know what design or hope he had for this hour, if indeed he had any. Most likely it seems that if he were here now the choice would still wait on you. Such is your fate.'
Frodo	`I know that haste is needed, yet I cannot choose. The burden is heavy. Give me an hour longer, and I will speak. Let me be alone! '
Drogo	`You shall have an hour, and you shall be alone. We will stay here for a while. But do not stray far or out of call.'
Sam	's no good Sam Gamgee putting in his spoke just now.'
Frodo	`If Aragorn is right and Orcs are near, then none of us should wander alone, and you least of all: so much depends on you. And my heart too is heavy. May I stay now and talk for a while, since I have found you? It would comfort me. Where there are so many, all speech becomes a debate without end. But two together may perhaps find wisdom.'
Frodo	'But I do not think that any speech will help me. For I know what I should do, but I am afraid of doing it, Boromir: afraid.'
Boromir	`I wish to help you. You need counsel in your hard choice. Will you not take mine? '
Boromir	'And it would seem like wisdom but for the warning of my heart.'
Boromir	'The Ring! Is it not a strange fate that we should suffer so much fear and doubt for so small a thing? So small a thing! And I have seen it only for an instant in the House of Elrond. Could I not have a sight of it again? '
Boromir	'It is best that it should lie hidden,'
Boromir	'Yet may I not even speak of it? For you seem ever to think only of its power in the hands of the Enemy: of its evil uses not of its good. The world is changing, you say. Minas Tirith will fall, if the Ring lasts. But why? Certainly, if the Ring were with the Enemy. But why, if it were with us? '
Frodo	`Because we cannot use it, and what is done with it turns to evil.'
Boromir	'Gandalf, Elrond - all these folk have taught you to say so. For themselves they may be right. These elves and half-elves and wizards, they would come to grief perhaps. Yet often I doubt if they are wise and not merely timid. But each to his own kind. True-hearted Men, they will not be corrupted. We of Minas Tirith have been staunch through long years of trial. We do not desire the power of wizard-lords, only strength to defend ourselves, strength in a just cause. And behold! in our need chance brings to light the -Ring of Power. It is a gift, I say; a gift to the foes of Mordor. It is mad not to use it, to use the power of the Enemy against him. The fearless, the ruthless, these alone will achieve victory. What could not a warrior do in this hour, a great leader? What could not Aragorn do? Or if he refuses, why not Boromir? The Ring would give me power of Command. How I would drive the hosts of Mordor, and all men would flock to my banner!'
Frodo	`You say that you are afraid. If it is so, the boldest should pardon you. But is it not really your good sense that revolts?'
Frodo	'Simply afraid. But I am glad to have heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.'
Boromir	' He laid his hand on the hobbit'
Boromir	`I am a true man, neither thief nor tracker. I need your Ring: that you know now; but I give you my word that I do not desire to keep it. Will you not at least let me make trial of my plan? Lend me the Ring! '
Frodo	'The Council laid it upon me to bear it.'
Boromir	`How it angers me! Fool! Obstinate fool! Running wilfully to death and ruining our cause. If any mortals have claim to the Ring, it is the men of Númenor, and not Halflings. It is not yours save by unhappy chance. It might have been mine. It should be mine. Give it to me! '
Boromir	'Why not get rid of it? Why not be free of your doubt and fear? You can lay the blame on me, if you will. You can say that I was too strong and took it by force. For I am too strong for you, halfling,'
Frodo	'Come back! A madness took me, but it has passed. Come back! '
Frodo	'This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring is already at work even in the Company, and the Ring must leave them before it does more harm. I will go alone. Some I cannot trust, and those I can trust are too dear to me: poor old Sam, and Merry and Pippin. Strider, too: his heart yearns for Minas Tirith, and he will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen into evil. I will go alone. At once.'
Elrond	's place? I do not know. Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.'
Legolas	'Yet we must needs make up our minds without his aid. Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo? Let us call him back and then vote! I should vote for Minas Tirith.'
Gimli	'We, of course, were only sent to help the Bearer along the road, to go no further than we wished; and none of us is under any oath or command to seek Mount Doom. Hard was my parting from Lothlórien. Yet I have come so far, and I say this: now we have reached the last choice, it is clear to me that I cannot leave Frodo. I would choose Minas Tirith, but if he does not, then I follow him.'
Legolas	`It would be faithless now to say farewell.'
Merry	't we stop him?'
Pippin	't leave him.'
Sam	's the good of Minas Tirith anyway? To him, I mean, begging your pardon, Master Boromir,'
Sam	's Baggins.'
Sam	`And what shall we do, if you prove right? '
Pippin	`This waiting is horrible! Surely the time is up? '
Boromir	`Have you seen Frodo? '
Boromir	`Yes: I found him some way up the hill, and I spoke to him. I urged him to come to Minas Tirith and not to go east. I grew angry and he left me. He vanished. I have never seen such a thing happen before. though I have heard of it in tales. He must have put the Ring on. I could not find him again. I thought he would return to you.'
Sam	't ought to have; and if he has, goodness knows what may have happened!'
Merry	`Not when he had escaped the unwelcome visitor, like Bilbo used to.'
Pippin	's been away ages now.'
Hal	`Or it might be an hour. I have wandered for some time since. I do not know! I do not know! '
Sam	`We must try and find him at once. Come on! '
Sam	`None of us should be alone. There is mischief about. I feel it. I am going to the top, to the Seat of Amon Hen, to see what may be seen. And look! It is as my heart guessed, Frodo went this way. Follow me, and keep your eyes open! '
Gamgee	's hard, cruel hard.'
Gamgee	's got to get back to the boats. Back to the boats! Back to the boats, Sam, like lightning! '
Sam	`Now take my hand! '
Sam	't see your hand.'
Sam	't a guessed right, where would you be now? '
Sam	'd have been the death of me.'
Sam	' said Frodo and I could not have borne that.'
Frodo	'm coming with you.'
Sam	's the only way.'
Sam	'll knock holes in all the boats first.'
Frodo	't come like this without your gear or food or anything.'
Sam	' He rushed to the camping place, fished out his pack from the pile where Frodo had laid it when he emptied the boat of his companions'
Sam	't suppose we shall see them again.'
