Bilbo	"Good morning!"
Bilbo	"All of them at once,"
Gandalf	"Very pretty!"
Hill	"Good morning!"
Gandalf	"What a lot of things you do use Good morning for!"
Belladonna	"Yes, yes, my dear sir - and I do know your name, Mr. Bilbo Baggins. And you do know my name, though you don'
Gandalf	"Gandalf, Gandalf! Good gracious me! Not the wandering wizard that gave Old Took a pair of magic diamond studs that fastened themselves and never came undone till ordered? Not the fellow who used to tell such wonderful tales at parties, about dragons and goblins and giants and the rescue of princesses and the unexpected luck of widows'
Belladonna	"Where else should I be?"
Bilbo	"What on earth did I ask him to tea for!"
Gandalf	"I am so sorry to keep you waiting!"
Gandalf	"So you have got here at last!"
Dwalin	"I see they have begun to arrive already,"
Bilbo	"Thank you!"
Balin	"A little beer would suit me better, if it is all the same to you, my good sir,"
Bilbo	"Lots!"
Bilbo	"Gandalf for certain this time,"
Kili	"What can I do for you, my dwarves?"
Bilbo	"At yours and your family'
Kili	"Dwalin and Balin here already, I see,"
Fili	"Throng!"
Gloin	"at your service"
Bifur	"Carefully! Carefully!"
Bifur	"At your service!"
Gandalf	"Now we are all here!"
Bifur	's that? Tea! No thank you! A little red wine, I think, for me."
Gandalf	"Put on a few eggs, there'
Baggins	"Seems to know as much about the inside of my larders as I do myself!"
Kili	"Confusticate and bebother these dwarves!"
Thorin	"I suppose you will all stay to supper?"
Bilbo	's. The Gandalf'
Thorin	"Now for some music!"
Bilbo	"Excuse me, I left mine in the porch!"
Thorin	"Where are you going?"
Bilbo	"What about a little light?"
Bilbo	"Of course!"
Gandalf	"Hush!"
Bilbo Baggins	"Gandalf, dwarves and Mr. Baggins! We are not together in the house of our friend and fellow conspirator, this most excellent and audacious hobbit - may the hair on his toes never fall out! all praise to his wine and ale! -"
Bilbo	's style. He was an important dwarf. If he had been allowed, he would probably have gone on like this until he was out of breath, without telling any one there '
Gandalf	"Excitable little fellow,"
Gandalf	's gentler descendant was reviving in the drawing-room. After a while and a drink he crept nervously to the door of the parlour. This is what he heard, Gloin speaking: "
Bullroarer	"Pardon me,"
Gloin	"Yes, yes, but that was long ago,"
Gandalf	"Of course there is a mark,"
Bilbo	"That'
Thorin	"I don'
Thorin	"It may have been secret once,"
Dale	"Because it is too small. '
Bilbo	"It seems a great big hole to me,"
Gandalf	"In lots of ways,"
Gandalf	"Also,"
Thorin	"Indeed I will,"
Gandalf	"A long time before that, if I know anything about the loads East,"
Thorin	"We might go from there up along the River Running,"
Bilbo Baggins	"That would be no good,"
Bilbo	"Very well then,"
Thorin	"Bless me!"
Gandalf	"All the same, I should like it all plain and clear,"
Thror	"O very well,"
North	"Undoubtedly that was what brought the dragon. Dragons steal gold and jewels, you know, from men and elves and dwarves, wherever they can find them; and they guard their plunder as long as they live (which is practically forever, unless they are killed), and never enjoy a brass ring of it. Indeed they hardly know a good bit of work from a bad, though they usually have a good notion of the current market value; and they can'
Thorin	"The few of us that were well outside sat and wept in hiding, and cursed Smaug; and there we were unexpectedly joined by my father and my grandfather with singed beards. They looked very grim but they said very little. When I asked how they had got away, they told me to hold my tongue, and said that one day in the proper time I should know. After that we went away, and we have had to earn our livings as best we could up and down the lands, often enough sinking as low as blacksmith-work or even coalmining. But we have never forgotten our stolen treasure. And even now, when I will allow we have a good bit laid by and are not so badly off"
Gandalf	"I have often wondered about my father'
Thorin	"Curse his name, yes,"
Thorin	"True, true,"
Thorin	"Well, your father gave me this to give to you; and if I have chosen my own time and way of handing it over, you can hardly blame me, considering the trouble I had to find you. Your father could not remember his own name when he gave me the paper, and he never told me yours; so on the whole I think I ought to be praised and thanked. Here it is,"
Bilbo	"I don'
Thorin	"Whatever were you doing there?"
Thorin	"Never you mind. I was finding things out, as usual; and a nasty dangerous business it was. Even I, Gandalf, only just escaped. I tried to save your father, but it was too late. He was witless and wandering, and had forgotten almost everything except the map and the key."
Bilbo	"Hear, hear!"
Thorin	"Before we go, I suppose you mean,"
Bilbo Baggins	"Don'
Baggins	"What message?"
Gandalf	"Great Elephants!"
Bilbo	"If you had dusted the mantelpiece you would have found this just under the clock,"
Gandalf	"That leaves you just ten minutes. You will have to run,"
Bilbo	"But-"
Bilbo	"But-"
Balin	"Bravo!"
Thorin	"Up you two get, and off we go!"
Bilbo	"I'
Dwalin	"Don'
Bilbo	's pipe and tobacco. So after that the party went along very merrily, and they told stories or sang songs as they rode forward all day, except of course when they stopped for meals. These didn'
Gandalf	't know what river it was, a rushing red one, swollen with the rains of the last few days, that came down from the hills and mountains in front of them. Soon it was nearly dark. The winds broke up the grey clouds, and a waning moon appeared above the hills between the flying rags. Then they stopped, and Thorin muttered something about supper, "
Gloin	"Just when a wizard would have been most useful, too,"
Gloin	"There'
Bilbo	"Now it is the burglar'
Bilbo	"all this dwarvish racket,"
William	"Never a blinking bit of manflesh have we had for long enough,"
Bert	"Shut yer mouth!"
Bilbo	' purses are the mischief, and this was no exception. "
William	"Blimey, Bert, look what I'
Bilbo	"Bilbo Baggins, a bur­- a hobbit,"
William	"What'
Tom	"And can yer cook '
Bert	"Yer can try,"
William	"He wouldn'
Bert	"P'
Bilbo	"Yes, lots,"
Bert	"What d'
Bilbo	"What I say,"
William	"Poor little blighter,"
Bert	"Not till he says what he means by lots and none at all,"
William	"I won'
Bert	"You'
Bert	"And I won'
Bilbo	"a sack, Tom, quick!"
Tom	"There'
Bert	"I reckon you'
Bifur	"That'
Bilbo	"It'
Bilbo	"O! are they?"
Bert	"No good roasting '
Bill	"Don'
Bert	"Who'
Bert	"You are,"
William	"You'
Bert	"No good boiling '
William	"Shut up yerself!"
William	"You'
Tom	"Booby yerself!"
Bert	"Better sit on the last fellow first,"
Tom	"Don'
Bert	"The one with the yellow stockings,"
William	"Nonsense, the one with the grey stockings,"
Bert	"I made sure it was yellow,"
William	"Yellow it was,"
Bert	"Then what did yer say it was grey for?"
Tom	"That I never did!"
Bert	"Two to one, so shut yer mouth!"
William	"Who are you a-talkin'
Bert	"Now stop it!"
Bert	"Dawn take you all, and be stone to you!"
Bilbo	"Excellent!"
Bombur	"Silly time to go practising pinching and pocket-picking,"
Gandalf	"And that'
Bilbo	"Would this be any good?"
Fili	"Let'
Gandalf	"Where did you go to, if I may ask?"
Thorin	"Exactly!"
Bilbo	"Where'
Elrond	"Don'
Thorin	"Thank you!"
Bilbo	"Is that The Mountain?"
Smaug	"Of course not!"
Bilbo	"O!"
Bilbo	"Here it is at last!"
Bilbo	"Hrnmm! it smells like elves!"
Bilbo	"Well, well!"
Gandalf	"Thank you!"
Thorin	"Don'
Gandalf	"Hush, hush! Good People! and good night!"
Gondolin	' lair, and he said: "
Thorin	"Whence did the trolls get them, I wonder?"
Elrond	"I could not say,"
Elrond	"A wish that is likely to be granted soon enough in the mountains!"
Elrond	"Moon-letters are rune-letters, but you cannot see them,"
Elrond	"What do they say?"
Elrond	"Stand by the grey stone when the thrush knocks,"
Thorin	"Durin, Durin!"
Elrond	"Then what is Durin'
Thorin	"The first day of the dwarves'
Gandalf	"That remains to be seen,"
Elrond	"None to be seen by this moon,"
Bilbo	"The summer is getting on down below,"
Thorin	"This won'
Gandalf	"Well, if you know of anywhere better, take us there!"
Bilbo	't know how far they go back, sometimes, or where a passage behind may lead to, or what is waiting for you inside. But now Fili and Kill'
Bilbo	"Dwarves, and this!"
Thorin	"What do you mean by it?"
Thorin	"Urn!"
Thorin	"We were on a journey to visit our relatives, our nephews and nieces, and first, second, and third cousins, and the other descendants of our grandfathers, who live on the East side of these truly hospitable mountains,"
Thorin	"He is a liar, O truly tremendous one!"
Thorin	"Murderers'
Bilbo	"Follow me quick!"
Bilbo	"Half a minute!"
Kili	"Are we all here?"
Bombur	"Why, O why did I ever leave my hobbit-hole!"
Bombur	"Why, O why did I ever bring a wretched little hobbit on a treasure hunt!"
Thorin	"About turn!"
Bilbo	"Very well,"
Bilbo	"Easy!"
Bilbo	"All right!"
Bilbo	"Half a moment!"
Bilbo	"Ss, ss, ss,"
Bilbo	"Well,"
Bilbo	"Is it nice, my preciousss? Is it juicy? Is it scrumptiously crunchable?"
Bilbo	"It must make haste, haste!"
Bilbo	"Very well! Guess away!"
Bilbo	"Wrong,"
Bilbo	"Wrong!"
Bilbo	"Come on!"
Bilbo	"Both wrong,"
Bilbo	"Never you mind,"
Bilbo	"Well, hurry up!"
Bilbo	"Where is it? Where iss it?"
Bilbo	"What'
Bilbo	"Well, so am I,"
Bilbo	"But you never guessed my last question, and you promised,"
Bilbo	"Oh well, if it'
Bilbo	"What has it got in its pocketses?"
Bilbo	"What have you lost?"
Baggins	"Curse it! curse it! curse it!"
Baggins	"It'
Baggins	"Then let'
Bilbo	"A bit low for goblins, at least for the big ones,"
Gandalf	"Good heavens!"
Gandalf	"I will give them all a surprise,"
Dori	"I brought him, and I don'
Dori	"You would have dropped him,"
Bilbo	"And here'
Balin	's reputation went up a very great deal with the dwarves after this. If they had still doubted that he was really a first-class burglar, in spite of Gandalf'
Balin	"Well, it is the first time that even a mouse has crept along carefully and quietly under my very nose and not been spotted,"
Bilbo	"Your servant, Mr. Baggins,"
Bilbo	"And then I couldn'
Bilbo	"What did I tell you?"
Gandalf	"I must see if I can'
North	"O yes!"
Bilbo	"I am so dreadfully hungry,"
Gandalf	"Can'
Bilbo	"No thank you!"
Gandalf	"Well! that has got us on a bit,"
Bilbo	"I daresay,"
Bilbo	"Must we go any further?"
Gandalf	"A bit further,"
Kili	"Up the trees quick!"
Dori	"You'
Dori	"I can'
Dori	"He'
Gandalf	"Go away! little boys!"
Dori	's ankles. He moaned "
Dori	"No you don'
Bilbo	"O no! Not a bit like storks-forks, I mean,"
Bilbo	"The Lord of the Eagles bids you to bring your prisoners to the Great Shelf,"
Bilbo	'prisoners'
Gandalf	"Very well,"
Bilbo	"I am nearly dead of it,"
Bilbo	's back and cling between his wings. The air rushed over him and he shut his eyes. The dwarves were crying farewells and promising to repay the lord of the eagles if ever they could, as off rose fifteen great birds from the mountain'
Gandalf	"May the wind under your wings bear you where the sun sails and the moon walks,"
Bilbo	"And why is it called the Carrock?"
Beorn	"Yes it certainly is! No I could not! And I was explaining very carefully,"
Bilbo	"What! a furrier, a man that calls rabbits conies, when he doesn'
Gandalf	"Good gracious heavens, no, no, NO, NO!"
Gandalf	"We are getting near,"
Bombur	"You had better wait here,"
Gandalf	"They have gone to tell him of the arrival of strangers,"
Gandalf	"Who are you and what do you want?"
bush	"Never heard of him,"
Bilbo	"That is Mr. Baggins, a hobbit of good family and unimpeachable reputation,"
Beorn	"Yes; not a bad fellow as wizards go, I believe. I used to see him now and again,"
Beorn	"Or two? I can only see one, and a little one at that,"
Beorn	"One or three you meant, I see!"
Beorn	"I don'
Gandalf	"They are on their way to visit the land of their fathers, away east beyond Mirkwood,"
Beorn	"Go on telling, then!"
Beorn	"Go on, whistle again! I am in for a party, it seems, and one or two more won'
Beorn	"Hullo!"
Beorn	"Nori at your service, Ori at . . ."
Gandalf	"As soon as we were asleep,"
Dwalin	"O no! As a matter of fact there were more than six ponies, for there were more than six of us-and well, here are two more!"
Beorn	"Now go on again!"
Beorn	"Good!"
Gandalf	"Well, yes, there seem to be a couple more here now - Fili and Kili, I believe,"
Beorn	"That'
Gloin	"Well, of course you haven'
Beorn	"O let '
Gandalf	"Well,"
Beorn	"Good heavens!"
Bombur	"And me!"
Beorn	"Well, now there are fifteen of you; and since goblins can count, I suppose that is all that there were up the trees. Now perhaps we can finish this story without any more interruptions."
Beorn	"It is time for us to sleep,"
Beorn	"Mostly inside us,"
Bilbo	"Where is Gandalf?"
Beorn	"O! out and about somewhere,"
Beorn	"I have been picking out bear-tracks,"
Warg	"What shall we do,"
Warg	"So here you all are still!"
Beorn	"It was a good story, that of yours,"
Bilbo	"What did you do with the goblin and the Warg?"
Beorn	"Come and see!"
Mirkwood	"But your way through Mirkwood is dark, dangerous and difficult,"
Beorn	"The goblins,"
Gandalf	"Well, here is Mirkwood!"
Beorn	"Beorn is not as far off as you seem to think, and you had better keep your promises anyway, for he is a bad enemy. Mr. Baggins'
Thorin	"What about the horse, then?"
Bilbo	"Now we had this all out before, when we landed on the Carrock,"
Thorin	"Don'
Gandalf	"Good-bye!"
Baggins	"Yes, you do!"
Bilbo	"No! no!"
Bilbo	"There is, if you care to go two hundred miles or so out of your way north, and twice that south. But you wouldn'
Thorin	"Very comforting you are to be sure,"
Gandalf	"Good-bye then, and really good-bye!"
Bilbo	"How far away do you think it is?"
Bilbo	"I don'
Fili	"Dori is the strongest, but Fili is the youngest and still has the best sight,"
Bilbo	"Not far enough!"
Bilbo	"Steady!"
Balin	"Help!"
Bilbo	"Who'
Kili	"I shall,"
Bombur	"I'
Fili	"Give me another length of rope and another hook,"
Bombur	"Bombur has fallen in! Bombur is drowning!"
Beorn	"Stop! stop!"
Thorin	"Is there no end to this accursed forest?"
Bilbo	"somebody"
Thorin	"You need not try,"
Beorn	"It looks as if my dreams were coming true,"
Bilbo	"But without a feast we shan'
Bilbo	"No rushing forward this time! No one is to stir from hiding till I say. I shall send Mr. Baggins alone first to talk to them. They won'
Don	"Good heavens! he has gone like Bombur,"
Kili	"They are the best I am likely to get in this beastly place,"
Bilbo	"Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, Gloin, Fili, Kili, Bombur, Bifur, Bofur, Dwalin, Balin, Thorin Oakenshield,"
Gandalf	"O! why did we not remember Beorn'
Bilbo	"It is poor old Bombur, I'
Bilbo	"Fili or Kili,"
Don	"Come down! Come down!"
Bilbo	"Lazy Lob"
Bilbo	"Go on! Go on!"
Bilbo	"Gollum! Well I'
Thorin	"Where is Thorin?"
Thorin	"We did not attack them,"
Balin	"What have we done, O king?"
Baggins	's palace. Magic shut the gates, but be could sometimes get out, if he was quick. Companies of the Wood-elves, sometimes with the king at their head, would from time to time ride out to hunt, or to other business in the woods and in the lands to the East. Then if Bilbo was very nimble, he could slip out just behind them; though it was a dangerous thing to do. More than once he was nearly caught in the doors, as they clashed together when the last elf passed; yet he did not dare to march among them because of his shadow (altogether thin and wobbly as it was in torch-light), or for fear of being bumped into and discovered. And when he did go out, which was not very often, he did no good. He did not wish to desert the dwarves, and indeed he did not know where in the world to go without them. He could not keep up with the hunting elves all the time they were out, so he never discovered the ways out of the wood, and was left to wander miserably in the forest, terrified of losing himself, until a chance came of returning. He was hungry too outside, for he was no hunter; but inside the caves he could pick up a living of some sort by stealing food from store or table when no one was at hand. "
Don	"No time now!"
Thorin	's heart thumped every time one of them bumped into another, or grunted or whispered in the dark. "
Bilbo	"Upon my word!"
Bilbo	"Very well!"
Baggins	"That will save him some of the trouble he is in for,"
Galion	's lid had been fitted on there came the sound of voices and the flicker of lights. A number of elves came laughing and talking into the cellars and singing snatches of song. They had left a merry feast in one of the halls and were bent on returning as soon as they could. "
Bilbo	"Well, are you alive or are you dead?"
Fili	"I hope I never smell the smell of apples again!"
Thorin	"Well! Here we are!"
Kili	"I suggest Lake-town,"
Kili	"And who are these?"
Kili	"The sons of my father'
Bilbo	"We have none,"
Fili	"Then all the more reason for taking us to him,"
Thorin	"I am Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King under the Mountain! I return!"
Thorin	"It is true that we were wrongfully waylaid by the Elven-king and imprisoned without cause as we journeyed back to our own land,"
Smaug	"Very well! We'
Thorin Thrain	"Let them go and bother Smaug, and see how he welcomes them!"
Thorin	"Not at any rate until the songs have come true!"
Thorin	"There lies all that is left of Dale,"
Balin	"That does not prove it,"
Bilbo	"doorstep"
Hill	"You said sitting on the doorstep and thinking would be my job, not to mention getting inside, so I am sitting and thinking."
Thorin	"Tomorrow begins the last week of Autumn,"
Bifur	"And winter comes after autumn,"
Dwalin	"And next year after that,"
Dale	"Good Gracious!"
Bilbo	"The key! The key!"
Bilbo	"The key!"
Oakenshield	"If you mean you think it is my job to go into the secret passage first, O Thorin Thrain'
Smaug	's little head. Before him lies the great bottommost cellar or dungeon-hall of the ancient dwarves right at the Mountain'
Kili	"Nonsense!"
Bombur	's anger were echoing in the stony hollows far above; at any moment he might come blazing down or fly whirling round and find them there, near the perilous cliff'
Thorin	"That'
Bilbo	"What else do you suppose a burglar is to do?"
Thorin	"What then do you propose we should do, Mr. Baggins?"
Bilbo	"Old Smaug is weary and asleep,"
Bilbo	"Truly songs and tales fall utterly short of the reality, O Smaug the Chiefest and Greatest of Calamities,"
Smaug	"So I can well believe,"
Smaug	"These don'
Bilbo	"I am the friend of bears and the guest of eagles. I am Ringwinner and Luckwearer; and I am Barrel-rider,"
Smaug	"That'
Bilbo	't want to reveal your proper name (which is wise), and don'
Bilbo	"Dwarves!"
Don	"Don'
Don	"I suppose you got a fair price for that cup last night?"
Smaug	"You don'
Smaug	"Ha! Ha! You admit the '
Esgaroth	"I don'
Smaug	"I tell you,"
Dale	"Revenge!"
Bilbo	"I have always understood,"
Bilbo	"I might have guessed it,"
Smaug	"Yes, it is rare and wonderful, indeed,"
Bilbo	"Dazzlingly marvellous! Perfect! Flawless! Staggering!"
dart	' one idea was to get away. "
Bilbo	'door-step.'
Bilbo	"Drat the bird!"
Thorin	"Leave him alone!"
Bilbo	"Well, he'
Smaug	"Well, well! It cannot be helped, and it is difficult not to slip in talking to a dragon, or so I have always heard,"
Smaug	"I am sure we are very unsafe here,"
Thorin	"You are very gloomy, Mr. Baggins!"
Smaug	"I don'
Bilbo	's lair was not one they liked. Also everything seemed quite quiet, both outside and down the tunnel. So for a longish while they sat inside not far down from the half-open door and went on talking. The talk turned to the dragon'
Thorin	"We knew it would be a desperate venture,"
Thorin	"The Arkenstone! The Arkenstone!"
Smaug	"Let us try the door!"
Don	"Now do be careful!"
Gloin	"Now I wonder what on earth Smaug is playing at,"
Bilbo	"Sh! sh!"
Bilbo	"Now I am a burglar indeed!"
North	"Only a bat, I suppose and hope!"
Thorin	"Now what on earth or under it has happened?"
Thorin	's distant voice. "
Balin	"It is about our turn to help,"
Arkenstone	"Only a bat and a dropped torch, nothing worse!"
Hill	"I feel magnificent,"
Beorn	"I would give a good many of these precious goblets, thought, "
Smaug	"Thorin!"
Thorin	'"
Thorin	"This is the great chamber of Thror,"
Thorin	"There is the birth of the Running River,"
Bilbo	"Well!"
Smaug	"It seems to be late morning,"
Balin	"Quite right!"
Thorin	"Come, come!"
Bilbo	"That won'
Don	"We must move away from here,"
Bombur	"It'
Balin	"Here,"
Dori	"Not much use, if we have been seen coming here,"
Thorin	"We must take our chance of that,"
Bilbo	"Hear, hear!"
Bard	"Wait! Wait!"
Bard	"He may have a good head for business-especially his own business,"
Esgaroth	"Bard is not lost!"
Bard	"Girion was lord of Dale, not king of Esgaroth,"
Bowman	"We will have King Bard!"
Bard	"I am the last man to undervalue Bard the Bowman,"
Bard	"Fools!"
Beorn	"Smaug is dead!"
Bard	"That will be the last we shall hear of Thorin Oakenshield, I fear,"
Thorin	"Something strange is happening,"
Smaug	"There is that old thrush again!"
Baggins	"I believe he is trying to tell us something,"
Bilbo	"Not very well,"
Balin	"I only wish he was a raven!"
Balin	"We may not understand him, but that old bird understands us, I am sure,"
Roac	"O Thorin son of Thrain, and Balin son of Fundin,"
Esgaroth	"Yes, dead,"
Dain	"Our thanks, Roac Carc'
Roac	"I will not say if this counsel be good or bad,"
Thorin	"Back now to the Mountain!"
Bilbo	"And little food to use!"
Smaug	"Back to the Mountain!"
Balin	"They have come!"
Thorin	"Who are you,"
Thorin	"You put your worst cause last and in the chief place,"
Bard	"A just question,"
Bard	"The Elvenking is my friend, and he has succoured the people of the Lake in their need, though they had no claim but friendship on him,"
Esgaroth	"In the name of Esgaroth and the Forest,"
Roac	"But they cannot reach the Mountain unmarked,"
Bombur	"It is mighty cold!"
Bilbo	"It is warm enough inside,"
Thorin	"I daresay; but I am bound here till midnight,"
Bilbo	"Not as stiff as my legs,"
Kili	"Off you go!"
Bilbo	"Servant, indeed!"
Bard	"I am Mr. Bilbo Baggins,"
Bilbo	"Really you know,"
Thorin	"A share in the profits, mind you,"
Bard	"Well, let him!"
Bilbo	"Quite so,"
Bard	"Why do you tell us this? Are you betraying your friends, or are you threatening us?"
Bilbo	"My dear Bard!"
Arkenstone	"You may see it!"
Bard	"This is the Arkenstone of Thrain,"
Thorin	"Bilbo Baggins!"
Bilbo	"Thank you very much I am sure,"
Bilbo	"Well done! Mr. Baggins!"
Gandalf	"All in good time!"
Thorin	"That will be Dain!"
Bard	"Hail Thorin!"
Thorin	"My mind does not change with the rising and setting of a few suns,"
Bard	"We are not thieves,"
Thorin	'How came you by it?"
Bilbo	"I gave it them!"
Bilbo	"You! You!"
Bilbo	"By the beard of Durin! I wish I had Gandalf here! Curse him for his choice of you! May his beard wither! As for you I will throw you to the rocks!"
Gandalf	"Stay! Your wish is granted!"
Bilbo	"You all seem in league!"
Bilbo	"Dear me! Dear me!"
Arkenstone	"I will,"
Bilbo	"Get down now to your friends!"
Bilbo	"What about the gold and silver?"
Bard	"Until then we keep the stone,"
Gandalf	"You are not making a very splendid figure as King under the Mountain,"
Dain	"They may indeed,"
Thorin	"Be off!"
Bard	"Not so hasty!"
Bard	"Fools!"
Dain	"Halt!"
Dain	"Come!"
Bard	"To the Mountain!"
Gandalf	's feet black with a hurrying multitude. Ere long the vanguard swirled round the spur'
Dain	"Moria!"
Bard	"It will not be long now,"
Bilbo	"The Eagles! the Eagles!"
Bilbo	"The Eagles!"
Bilbo	"What voice is it that speaks among the stones?"
Bilbo Baggins	"It'
Gandalf	"It is well that I have found you!"
Bilbo	"A nasty knock on the head, I think,"
Baggins	"Farewell, King under the Mountain!"
Thorin	"No!"
Bilbo Baggins	"A mercy it is,"
North	's shape; and he seemed to have grown almost to giant-size in his wrath. The roar of his voice was like drums and guns; and he tossed wolves and goblins from his path like straws and feathers. He fell upon their rear, and broke like a clap of thunder through the ring. The dwarves were making a stand still about their lords upon a low rounded hill. Then Beorn stooped and lifted Thorin, who had fallen pierced with spears, and bore him out of the fray. Swiftly he returned and his wrath was redoubled, so that nothing could withstand him, and no weapon seemed to bite upon him. He scattered the bodyguard, and pulled down Bolg himself and crushed him. Then dismay fell on the Goblins and they fled in all directions. But weariness left their enemies with the coming of new hope, and they pursued them closely, and prevented most of them from escaping where they could. They drove many of them into the Running River, and such as fled south or west they hunted into the marshes about the Forest River; and there the greater part of the last fugitives perished, while those that came hardly to the Wood-elves'
Gandalf	"Where are the Eagles?"
Dain	"Some are in the hunt,"
Bilbo	"I am sorry. I mean, I should have liked to see them again,"
Bard	"There let it lie till the Mountain falls!"
Bilbo	"Very kind of you,"
Kili	"Farewell, Balin!"
Balin	"Good-bye and good luck, wherever you fare!"
Bilbo	"If ever you are passing my way,"
Gandalf	"Farewell! O Elvenking!"
Bilbo	"I beg of you,"
Bilbo	"Well, er, I thought, don'
Bilbo	's house; and there for a while they both stayed. Yule-tide was warm and merry there; and men came from far and wide to feast at Beorn'
Bilbo	"So comes snow after fire, and even dragons have their ending!"
Gandalf	"Ere long now,"
Elrond	"It would be well indeed,"
Bilbo	"Well, Merry People!"
Tom	"And your snores would waken a stone dragon - yet we thank you,"
Bilbo	"Merry is May-time!"
Gandalf	"There is a long road yet,"
Bilbo	"But it is the last road,"
Bilbo	's own door. "
Bilbo	'clock sharp. It was now nearly lunch-time, and most of the things had already been sold, for various prices from next to nothing to old songs (as is not unusual at auctions). Bilbo'
Baggins	'queer'
Gandalf	"There and Back Again, a Hobbit'
Bilbo	"Come in! Come in!"
Balin	"The new Master is of wiser kind,"
Bilbo	"Then the prophecies of the old songs have turned out to be true, after a fashion!"
Gandalf	"Of course!"
Bilbo	"Thank goodness!"
Bilbo	"Do you wish me a good morning, or mean that it is a good morning whether I want not; or that you feel good this morning; or that it is morning to be good on?"
Bilbo	's no hurry, we have all the day before us!"
Gandalf	's very difficult to find anyone."
Gandalf	't be good till I move off."
Bilbo Baggins	's son, as if I was selling buttons at the door!"
Gandalf	"Not the Gandalf who was responsible for so many quiet lads and lasses going off into the Blue for mad adventures. Anything from climbing trees to visiting Elves - or sailing in ships, sailing to other shores! Bless me, life used to be quite inter - I mean, you used to upset things badly in these parts once upon a time. I beg your pardon, but I had no idea you were still in business."
Bilbo Baggins	"I am just about to take tea; pray come and have some with me."
Dwalin	"Balin at your service!"
Balin	't mind some cake-seed-cake, if you have any."
Kili	"And Fili!"
Kili	"Let us join the throng!"
Fili	"Be-sides, we saw them coming along behind us in the distance."
Bifur	't mention it,"
Bifur	't mind,"
Gandalf	"And just bring out the cold chicken and pickles!"
Thorin	't get through the business till late, and we must have some music first. Now to clear up!"
Gandalf	't trouble! I can manage."
Gandalf	's smoke-ring would go green and come back to hover over the wizard'
Thorin	"Bring out the instruments!"
Kili	"Just bring mine in with you,"
Gandalf	"Let Thorin speak!"
Bilbo	"struck by lightning, struck by lightning!"
Gandalf	"Gets funny queer fits, but he is one of the best, one of the best-as fierce as a dragon in a pinch."
Gloin	"Will he do, do you think? It is all very well for Gandalf to talk about this hobbit being fierce, but one shriek like that in a moment of excitement would be enough to wake the dragon and all his relatives, and kill the lot of us. I think it sounded more like fright than excitement! In fact, if it bad not been for the sign on the door, I should have been sure we had come to the wrong house. As soon as I clapped eyes on the little fellow bobbing and puffing on the mat, I had my doubts. He looks more like a grocer-than a burglar!"
Baggins	"Bilbo, you were a fool; you walked right in and put your foot in it."
Gloin	's all the same to us. Gandalf told us that there was a man of the sort in these parts looking for a Job at once, and that he had arranged for a meeting here this Wednesday tea-time."
Gandalf	"I put it there myself. For very good reasons. You asked me to find the fourteenth man for your expedition, and I chose Mr. Baggins. Just let any one say I chose the wrong man or the wrong house, and you can stop at thirteen and have all the bad luck you like, or go back to digging coal."
Bilbo	's have little light on this!"
Thror	"It is a plan of the Mountain."
Thorin	"I remember the Mountain well enough and the lands about it. And I know where Mirkwood is, and the Withered Heath where the great dragons bred."
Balin	"but it will be easy enough to find him without that, if ever we arrive there."
Thorin	"but how do we know that it is secret any longer? Old Smaug had lived there long enough now to find out anything there is to know about those caves."
Bilbo	"How could such a large door be kept secret from everybody outside, apart from the dragon?"
Gandalf	"Quite right,"
Gandalf	"Keep it safe!"
Thorin	"Now things begin to look more hopeful. This news alters them much for-the better. So far we have had no clear idea what to do. We thought of going East, as quiet and careful as we could, as far as the Long Lake. After that the trouble would begin."
Thorin	"and so to the ruins of Dale-the old town in the valley there, under the shadow of the Mountain. But we none of us liked the idea of the Front Gate. The river runs right out of it through the great cliff at the South of the Mountain, and out of it comes the dragon too-far too often, unless he has changed."
Bilbo Baggins	's get on and make some plans."
Thorin	"supposing the burglar-expert gives us some ideas or suggestions."
Thorin	't we been talking about all this for hours?"
Gandalf	"What am I going to get out of it? and am I going to come back alive?"
Thror	's time our family was driven out of the far North, and came back with all their wealth and their tools to this Mountain on the map. It had been discovered by my far ancestor, Thrain the Old, but now they mined and they tunnelled and they made huger halls and greater workshops -and in addition I believe they found a good deal of gold and a great many jewels too. Anyway they grew immensely rich and famous, and my grandfather was King under the Mountain again and treated with great reverence by the mortal men, who lived to the South, and were gradually spreading up the Running River as far as the valley overshadowed by the Mountain. They built the merry town of Dale there in those days. Kings used to send for our smiths, and reward even the least skilful most richly. Fathers would beg us to take their sons as apprentices, and pay us handsomely, especially in food-supplies, which we never bothered to grow or find for ourselves. Altogether those were good days for us, and the poorest of us had money to spend and to lend, and leisure to make beautiful things just for the. fun of it, not to speak of the most marvellous and magical toys, the like of which is not to be found in the world now-a-days. So my grandfather'
North	't know for certain, but I don'
Smaug	"-here Thorin stroked the gold chain round his neck-"
Gandalf	't be absurd! He is an enemy quite beyond the powers of all the dwarves put together, if they could all be collected again from the four corners of the world. The one thing your father wished was for his son to read the map and use the key. The dragon and the Mountain are more than big enough tasks for you!"
Bilbo	's that?"
Thorin	'em."
Bilbo	"but with never a thank-you"
Bilbo Baggins	"whenever are you going to come? What about an early start?-and here you are having breakfast, or whatever you call it, at half past ten! They left you the message, because they could not wait."
Gandalf	"you are not at all yourself this morning-you have never dusted the mantel- piece!"
Bilbo	't get your note until after 10.45 to be precise."
Dwalin	's end. As for a hat, I have got a spare hood and cloak in my luggage."
Bungo	't think. His only comfort was he couldn'
Bilbo	"Bother burgling and everything to do with it! I wish I was at home in my nice hole by the fire, with the kettle just beginning to sing!"
Thorin	"and where shall we get a dry patch to sleep on?"
Kili	"After all we have got a burglar with us,"
Bilbo	't, hoot twice like a barn-owl and once like a screech-owl, and we will do what we can."
Bilbo	't sup-pose you or I would notice anything at all on a windy night, not if the whole cavalcade had passed two feet off. As for Bilbo walking primly towards the red light, I don'
William	's more,"
Bert	" He took a big bite off a sheep'
Bilbo	"this is a beginning!"
Bert	've copped!"
William	"not when he was skinned and boned."
Bert	" said he looking at the hobbit'
Bilbo	"No, none at all, not one,"
Bilbo	't have me for supper."
William	"Poor little blighter! Let him go!"
Bert	't want to have me throat cut in me sleep. Hold his toes in the fire, till he talks!"
William	"I caught him anyway."
Bert	've said afore this evening."
Bill	" says Bert, and puts his fist in William'
Bilbo	's arms, and rolling nearly into the fire kicking and thumping, while Tom whacked at then both with a branch to bring them to their senses-and that of course only made them madder than ever. That would have been the time for Bilbo to have left. But his poor little feet had been very squashed in Bert'
Bilbo	"a sack, Tom, quick!"
Tom	's about the shape of it!"
Bert	'd best get out of the light."
Thorin	's all this trouble? Who has been knocking my people about?"
Bilbo	're hiding in the bushes with sacks,"
Bilbo	's leg-as well as he could, it was thick as a young tree-trunk -but he was sent spinning up into the top of some bushes, when Tom kicked the sparks up in Thorin'
Bill	"or it will take all night."
William	'd like to know."
Don	"But if you wants to sit on the last one, sit on him. Which is he?"
Tom	"It was you."
Bert	's get on with it!"
William	's. But it wasn'
Bombur	"when what we wanted was fire and food!"
Don	't you realize that the trolls must have a cave or a hole dug somewhere near to hide from the sun in? We must look into it!"
Bilbo	"I found it on the ground where the trolls had their fight."
Thorin	"but could you be more plain?"
Gandalf	're lucky, and find out all about it As I was saying I met two of Elrond'
Balin	"That is only the beginning of the Misty Mountains, and we have to get through, or over, or under those somehow, before we can come into Wilderland beyond. And it is a deal of a way even from the other side of them to the Lonely Mountain in the East Where Smaug lies on our treasure."
Gandalf	"We need food, for one thing, and rest in reasonable safety-also it is very necessary to tackle the Misty Mountains by the proper path, or else you will get lost in them, and have to come back and start at the beginning again (if you ever get back at all)."
Bilbo	't it delicious!"
Thorin	"It is long enough without watering it."
Bilbo	"He is too fat to get through key-holes yet!"
Gandalf	"Valleys have ears, and some elves have over merry tongues. Good night!"
Gondolin	's hoard or goblin plunder, for dragons and goblins destroyed that city many ages ago. This, Thorin, the runes name Orcrist, the Goblin-cleaver in the ancient tongue of Gondolin; it was a famous blade. This, Gandalf, was Glamdring, Foe-hammer that the king of Gondolin once wore. Keep them well!"
Elrond	"but one may guess that your trolls had plundered other plunderers, or come on the remnants of old robberies in some hold in the mountains of the North. I have heard that there are still forgotten treasures of old to be found in the deserted caverns of the mines of Moria, since the dwarf and goblin war."
Thorin	"May it soon cleave goblins once again!"
Elrond	' "
Elrond	's eve in a crescent moon, a long while ago."
Elrond	's Day will shine upon the key-hole."
Thorin	"He was the father of the fathers of the eldest race of Dwarves, the Longbeards, and my first ancestor: I am his heir."
Thorin	's Day when the last moon of Autumn and the sun are in the sky together. But this will not help us much, I fear, for it passes our skill in these days to guess when such a time will come again."
Gandalf	"Is there any more writing?"
Bilbo	's Day"
Thorin	't get blown off or drowned, or struck by lightning, we shall be picked up by some giant and kicked sky-high for a football."
Kili	"not far round the next corner; and ponies and all could get inside."
Fili	's news seemed good enough. So they all got up and prepared to move. The wind was howling and the thunder still growling, and they had a business getting themselves and their ponies along. Still it was not very far to go, and before long they came to a big rock standing out into the path. If you stepped behind, you found a low arch in the side of the mountain. There was just room to get the ponies through with a squeeze, when they had been unpacked and unsaddled. As they passed under the arch, it was good to hear the wind and the rain outside instead of all about them, and to feel safe from the giants and their rocks. But the wizard was taking no risks. He lit up his wand - as he did that day in Bilbo'
Thorin	's people, because of the war which you have heard mentioned, but which does not come into this tale; and anyway goblins don'
Thorin	't be surprised to learn! Murderers and friends of Elves, not unlikely! Come! What have you got to say?"
Thorin	"Of the things which you suspect and imagine we had no idea at all. We sheltered from a storm in what seemed a convenient cave and unused; nothing was further from our thoughts than inconveniencing goblins in any way whatever."
Thorin	's have the truth, or I will prepare something particularly uncomfortable for you!"
Kili	's Mr. Baggins: fourteen! Well, well! it might be worse, and then again it might be a good deal better. No ponies, and no food, and no knowing quite where we are, and hordes of angry goblins just behind! On we go!"
Gandalf	"Draw your sword, Thorin!"
Bilbo Baggins	't want to know, if only I can get away."
Bilbo	"Mountain, I suppose."
Bilbo	'll puzzle the nasty little underground creature,"
Bilbo	"Sun on the daisies it means, it does."
Bilbo	"Dark!"
Bilbo	's not a kettle boiling over, as you seem to think from the noise you are making."
Bilbo	"what about your guess?"
Bilbo	"Fish on a little table, man at table sitting on a stool, the cat has the bones"
Bilbo	"Give me more time! Give me time!"
Bilbo	"What have I got in my pocket?"
Bilbo	"Guess again!"
Bilbo	"Last guess!"
Bilbo	"I am waiting!"
Bilbo	"A promise is a promise."
Bilbo	"Losst it is, my precious, lost, lost! Curse us and crush us, my precious is lost!"
Bilbo	"What have you lost?"
Bilbo	"and I want to get unlost. And I won the game, and you promised. So come along! Come and let me out, and then go on with your looking!"
Bilbo	"Answers were to be guessed not given,"
Bilbo	"then I asked one first. What have you lost? Tell me that!"
Baggins	's found it, yes he must have. My birthday-present."
Bilbo	'll have heard his shrieking and cursing. Careful now, or this way will lead you to worse things."
Gandalf	't bring things that are of no use. Either you help me to look for him, or I go and leave you here to get out of the mess as best you can yourselves. If we can only find him again, you will thank me before all is over. Whatever did you want to go and drop him for, Dori?"
Dori	"if a goblin had suddenly grabbed your leg from behind in the dark, tripped up your feet, and kicked you in the back!"
Thorin	' and everybody ought to have followed. We thought everybody had. There was no time to count, as you know quite well, till we had dashed through the gate-guards, out of the lower door, and helter-skelter down here. And here we are-without the burglar, confusticate him!"
Bilbo	's reputation went up a very great deal with the dwarves after this. If they had still doubted that he was really a first-class burglar, in spite of Gandalf'
Bilbo	"O, just crept along, you know-very carefully and quietly."
Balin	"and I take off my hood to you."
Bilbo	' But he came at me to kill me, and I ran, and fell over, and he missed me in the dark. Then I followed him, because I heard him talking to himself. He thought I really knew the way out, and so he was making for it. And then he sat down in the entrance, and I could not get by. So I jumped over him and escaped, and ran down to the gate."
Gandalf	"Mr. Baggins has more about him than you guess."
Gandalf	"or soon there will be no getting over the mountains at all."
North	's get on!"
Gandalf	"unless you like to go back and ask the goblins nicely to let you have your pony back and your luggage."
Gandalf	"and even goblins tracking us will have a job to come down here quietly."
Bombur	't find it difficult to send stones bouncing down on our heads."
Bilbo	"My toes are all bruised and bent, and my legs ache, and my stomach is wagging like an empty sack."
Dori	"down tunnels and up trees! What do you think I am? A porter?"
Dori	"be quick, and give Mr. Baggins a hand up!"
Gandalf	't bird-nesting time. Also naughty little boys that play with fire get punished."
Bilbo	"my poor legs, my poor legs!"
Dori	"Now I know what a piece of bacon feels like when it is suddenly picked out of the pan on a fork and put back on the shelf!"
Dori	't forks!"
Bilbo	'prisoners,'
Bilbo	'prisoners rescued from the goblins'
Gandalf	"Take us where and as far as you will! We are already deeply obliged to you. But in the meantime we are famished with hunger."
Don	"You need not be frightened like a rabbit, even if you look rather like one. It is a fair morning with little wind. What is finer than flying?"
Bilbo	"A warm bath and late breakfast on the lawn afterwards;"
Bilbo	' "
Bilbo	't you better explain it all a bit clearer?"
Gandalf	't be a fool Mr. Baggins if you can help it; and in the name of all wonder don'
Gandalf	"We are on the edge of his bee-pastures."
Bilbo	"I have heard of you, if you have not heard of me; but perhaps you have heard of my good cousin Radagast who lives near the Southern borders of Mirkwood?"
Beorn	"Well, now I know who you are, or who you say you are. What do you want?"
Beorn	't hobbits, they are dwarves!"
Beorn	"but I expect you need mine. I am not over fond of dwarves; but if it is true you are Thorin (son of Thrain, son of Thror, I believe), and that your companion is respectable, and that you are enemies of goblins and are not up to any mischief in my lands-what are you up to, by the way?"
Gandalf	"and it is entirely an accident that we are in your lands at all. We were crossing by the High Pass that should have brought us to the road that lies to the south of your country, when we were attacked by the evil goblins­-as I was about to tell you."
Beorn	"You came pretty quick-where were you hiding? Come on my jack-in-the-boxes!"
Gandalf	"a crack at the back of the cave opened; goblins came out and grabbed the hobbit and the dwarves and our troop of ponies-"
Beorn	"It is some good being a wizard, then."
Beorn	"Sit down and be quiet! Now go on, Gandalf!"
Gandalf	" Beorn did not show it more than he could help, but really he had begun to get very interested. You see, in the old days he had known the very part of the mountains that Gandalf was describing. He nodded and he growled, when he heard of the hobbit'
Gandalf	"I did the best I could. There we were with the wolves going mad underneath us and the forest beginning to blaze in places, when the goblins came down from the hills and discovered us. They yelled with delight and sang songs making fun of us. Fifteen birds in five fir-trees…"
Beorn	't fifteen and they know it."
Bifur	't ventured to introduce them before, but here they are."
Bifur	"And me!"
Bilbo	's big black chair of the same sort (in which he sat with his great legs stuck far out under the table). These were all the chairs he had in his hall, and he probably had them low like the tables for the convenience of the wonderful animals that waited on him. What did the rest sit on? They were not forgotten. The other ponies came in rolling round drum-shaped sections of logs, smoothed and polished, and low enough even for Bilbo; so soon they were all seated at Beorn'
Bilbo	"-for us, but not I think for Beorn. In this hall we can rest sound and safe, but I warn you all not to forget what Beorn said before he left us: you must not stray outside until the sun is up, on your peril."
Bilbo	"Where is breakfast?"
Gandalf	"-but bless me! this is a splendid place for smoke rings!"
Bilbo	"if he leads all the Wargs and the goblins down here? We shall all be caught and killed! I thought you said he was not 9 friend of theirs."
Warg	"Come and have some more!"
Beorn	's nose and the death from the wizard'
Beorn	"but I like it still better now I am sure it is true. You must forgive my not taking your word. If you lived near the edge of Mirkwood, you would take the word of no one that you did not know as well as your brother or better. As it is, I can only say that I have hurried home as fast as I could to see that you were safe, and to offer you any help that I can. I shall think more kindly of dwarves after this. Killed the Great Goblin, killed the Great Goblin!"
Gandalf	"That is all the advice I can give you. Beyond the edge of the forest I cannot help you much; you must depend on your luck and your courage and the food I send with you. At the gate of the forest I must ask you to send back my horse and my ponies. But I wish you all speed, and my house is open to you, if ever you come back this way again."
Beorn	"will not dare to cross the Great River for a hundred miles north of the Carrock nor to come near my house - it is well protected at night!- but I should ride fast; for if they make their raid soon they will cross the river to the south and scour all the edge of the forest so as to cut you off, and Wargs run swifter than ponies. Still you are safer going north, even though you seem to be going back nearer to their strongholds; for that is what they will least expect, and they will have the longer ride to catch you. Be off now as quick as you may!"
Bilbo	"Hush! Take no notice!"
Gandalf	"The greatest of the forests of the Northern world. I hope you like the look of it. Now you must send back these excellent ponies you have borrowed."
Beorn	' eyes are sharper than yours, if you have not seen each night after dark a great bear going along with us or sitting far of in the moon watching our camps. Not only to guard you and guide you, but to keep an eye on the ponies too. Beorn may be your friend, but he loves his animals as his children. You do not guess what kindness he has shown you in letting dwarves ride them so far and so fast, nor what would happen to you, if you tried to take them into the forest."
Thorin	't mention sending that back."
Bilbo	't look so glum. Cheer up Thorin and Company! This is your expedition after all. Think of the treasure at the end, and forget the forest and the dragon, at any rate until tomorrow morning!"
Thorin	"It will get lighter all too soon. Before long I expect we shall all wish our packs heavier, when the food begins to run short."
Bilbo	"a sort of watching and waiting feeling,"
Gandalf	't suppose I, or any one else, will ever see you again."
Bilbo	't mean that. I meant, is there no way round?"
Bilbo	't advise you to go anywhere near the places overlooked by his dark tower! Stick to the forest-track, keep your spirits up, hope for the best, and with a tremendous slice of luck you may come out one day and see the Long Marshes lying below you, and beyond them, high in the East, the Lonely Mountain where dear old Smaug lives, though I hope he is not expecting you."
Thorin	't come with us, you had better get off without any more talk!"
Gandalf	'T LEAVE THE PATH!"
Bilbo	"not animal eyes, only they are much too big."
Bilbo	't it have been this side!"
Bilbo	't be sure in this light; but it looks to me as if it was just drawn up on the bank, which is low just there where the path goes down into the water."
Fili	"Come here Fili, and see if you can see the boat Mr. Baggins is talking about."
Bilbo	't suppose the magic is strong enough to hurt you, if you just touch a bit of wet rope."
Bilbo	"you have thrown it right into the wood on the other side now. Draw it back gently."
Kili	"Help!"
Fili	's as many as the boat will hold at a time. After that Kili and Oin and Gloin and Don; next On and Nori, Bifur and Bofur; and last Dwalin and Bombur."
Bombur	's turn today."
Don	't start grumbling against orders, or something bad will happen to you."
Fili	"and one of you haul on the rope that is stuck in a tree on the other side. One of the others must keep hold of the hook we used at first, and when we are safe on the other side he can hook it on, and you can draw the boat back."
Bilbo	"Bombur has fallen in! Bombur is drowning!"
Bilbo	'purple emperor,'
Thorin	't waked up, we should have left you to your idiotic dreams in the forest; you are no joke to carry even after weeks of short commons."
Balin	"What was that? I thought I saw a twinkle of light in the forest."
Beorn	"A feast would be no good, if we never got back alive from it,"
Bilbo	't do anything nasty to him."
Bilbo	"Bilbo Baggins! Hobbit! You dratted hobbit! Hi! hobbit, confusticate you, where are you?"
Bombur	't share them."
Kili	"Bilbo!"
Bilbo	"What a mess we are in now! We! I only wish it was we: it is horrible being all alone."
Don	're not as fat as they might be. Been feeding none too well of late, I should guess."
Kill	'em dead for a while."
Bombur	'll bet,"
Kili	"Most likely Fili,"
Don	't stay up there and be netted!"
Dwalin	"Where is Thorin?"
Thorin	"we came to beg, because we were starving."
Balin	' rouse the spiders with your riot and clamour? After all the disturbance you have made I have a right to know what brings you here, and if you will not tell me now, I will keep you all in prison until you have learned sense and manners!"
Bilbo	"This is the dreariest and dullest part of all this wretched, tiresome, uncomfortable adventure! I wish I was back in my hobbit-hole by my own warm fireside with the lamp shining!"
Bilbo	's feasts only, and for smaller bowls, not for the butler'
Don	's a good fellow!"
Bilbo	's folks were merrymaking. At last after much blundering they came to Thorin'
Bilbo	"Gandalf spoke true, as usual. A pretty fine burglar you make, it seems, when the time comes. I am sure we are all for ever at your service, whatever happens after this. But what comes next?"
Bilbo	't suppose I shall ever get hold of the keys again, even if I feel inclined to try."
Baggins	't a bad fellow, and quite decent to the prisoners. It will puzzle them all too. They will think we had a very strong magic to pass through all those locked doors and disappear. Disappear! We have got to get busy very quick, if that is to happen!"
Galion	't seen him at the tables tonight. He ought to be here now to show us what is to be done."
Galion	"you began your feasting early and muddled your wits! You have stacked some full casks here instead of the empty ones, if there is anything in weight."
Bilbo	's yours after all and not mine-you had better slap your arms and rub your legs and try and help me get the others out while there is a chance!"
Fili	"My tub was full of it. To smell apples everlastingly when you can scarcely move and are cold and sick with hunger is maddening. I could eat anything in the wide world now, for hours on end-but not an apple!"
Thorin	"And I suppose we ought to thank our stars and Mr. Baggins. I am sure he has a right to expect it, though I wish he could have arranged a more comfortable journey. Still-all very much at your service once more, Mr. Baggins. No doubt we shall feel properly grateful, when we are fed and recovered. In the meanwhile what next?"
Bilbo	"What else is there?"
Thror	"I have come back. I wish to see the Master of your town!"
Thorin	"Fili and Kili of the race of Durin, and Mr. Baggins who has travelled with us out of the West."
Bilbo	"We have no need of weapons, who return at last to our own as spoken of old. Nor could we fight against so many. Take us to your master!"
Fili	"We are worn and famished after our long road and we have sick comrades. Now make haste and let us have no more words, or your master may have something to say to you."
Thror	" cried Thorin in a loud voice from the door, before the captain could say anything. All leaped to their feet. The Master of the town sprang from his great chair. But none rose in greater surprise than the raft-men of the elves who were sitting at the lower end of the hall. Pressing forward before the Master'
Thorin	' realm. I speak to the Master of the town of the Men of the lake, not to the raft-men of the king."
Thorin Thrain	"You must claim your own. The hour is at hand, spoken of old. What help we can offer shall be yours, and we trust to your gratitude when your kingdom is regained."
Dale	" He looked both sad and grim as he said this: he had been one of Thorin'
Balin	't doubt you are right. But he might be gone away some time, or he might be lying out on the mountain-side keeping watch, and still I expect smokes and steams would come out of the gates: all the halls within must be filled with his foul reek."
Elrond	's marauding feet, and there was some grass for their ponies. From this western camp, shadowed all day by cliff and wall until the sun began to sink towards the forest, day by day they toiled in parties searching for paths up the mountain-side. If the map was true, somewhere high above the cliff at the valley'
Kili	's head and were gazing down on to their own camp below. Silently, clinging to the rocky wall on their right, they went in single file along the ledge, till the wall opened and they turned into a little steep-walled bay, grassy-floored, still and quiet. Its entrance which they had found could not be seen from below because of the overhang of the cliff, nor from further off because it was so small that it looked like a dark crack and no more. It was not a cave and was open to the sky above; but at its inner end a flat wall rose up that in the lower I part, close to the ground, was as smooth and upright as mason'
Bilbo	" in fun, remembering Bilbo'
Bilbo	't think I could bear to see the unhappy valley of Dale again, and as for that steaming gate! ! !"
Bilbo	"Perhaps the wizard will suddenly come back today,"
Bilbo	"Where is Thorin?"
Bilbo	"The key that went with the map! Try it now while there is still time!"
Thorin Thrain	"but anyway I think I will go and have a peep at once and get it over. Now who is coming with me?"
Bilbo	" and stopped where he could still see the faint outline of the door, and by a trick of, the echoes of the tunnel hear the rustle of the whispering voices of the others just outside. Then the hobbit slipped on his ring, and warned by the echoes to take more than hobbit'
Bilbo Baggins	"I have absolutely no use for dragon-guarded treasures, and the whole lot could stay here for ever, if only I could wake up and find this beastly tunnel was my own front-hall at home!"
Bilbo	's little head. Before him lies the great bottommost cellar or dungeon-hall of the ancient dwarves right at the Mountain'
Bilbo	'll hear no more of that."
Bilbo	's no good here."
Bifur	"My cousins! Bombur and Bofur - we have forgotten them, they are down in the valley!"
Kili	't have all of us. Now you others, where are the ropes? Be quick!"
Smaug	's anger were echoing in the stony hollows far above; at any moment he might come blazing down or fly whirling round and find them there, near the perilous cliff'
Bilbo	's work, but to steal treasure. I made the best beginning I could. Did you expect me to trot back with the whole hoard of Thror on my back? If there is any grumbling to be done, I think I might have a say. You ought to have brought five hundred burglars not one. I am sure it reflects great credit on your grandfather, but you cannot pretend that you ever made the vast extent of his wealth clear to me. I should want hundreds of years to bring it all up, if I was fifty times as big, and Smaug as tame as a rabbit."
Smaug	' as my father used to say, though I am sure it was not from personal experience."
Bilbo	" He had forgotten or had never heard about dragons'
Smaug	"I did not come for presents. I only wished to have a look at you and see if you were truly as great as tales say. I did not believe them."
Smaug	"but that is hardly our usual name."
Smaug	't let your imagination run away with you!"
Don	't mind if you go back and tell them so from me."
Don	't you believe it! If you get off alive, you will be lucky."
Smaug	"Not gold alone brought us hither."
Smaug	'us fourteen'
Dale	"My armour is like tenfold shields, my teeth are swords, my claws spears, the shock of my tail a thunderbolt, my wings a hurricane, and my breath death!"
Bilbo	"that dragons were softer underneath, especially in the region of the-er-chest; but doubtless one so fortified has thought of that."
Bilbo	"Truly there can; nowhere be found the equal of Lord Smaug the Impenetrable. What magnificence to possess a waistcoat of fine diamonds!"
Smaug	"What do you say to that?"
Bilbo	"Old fool! Why there is a large patch in the hollow of his left breast as bare as a snail out of its shell!"
Baggins	"or keep you from much needed rest. Ponies take some catching, I believe, after a long start. And so do burglars,"
Bilbo	't nearly through this adventure yet,"
Bilbo	't like the look of him."
Thorin	"The thrushes are good and friendly-this is a very old bird indeed, and is maybe the last left of the ancient breed that used to live about here, tame to the hands of my father and grandfather. They were a long-lived and magical race, and this might even be one of those that were alive then, a couple of hundreds years or more ago. The Men of Dale used to have the trick of understanding their language, and used them for messengers to fly to the Men of the Lake and elsewhere."
Bilbo	't suppose there are any people left there that trouble with thrush-language."
Bilbo	"I am sure he knows we came from Lake-town and had help from there; and I have a horrible feeling that his next move may be in that direction. I wish to goodness I had never said that about Barrel-rider; it would make even a blind rabbit in these parts think of the Lake-men."
Smaug	's diamond waistcoat."
Thorin	"Why has not Smaug blocked the lower end, then, if he is so eager to keep us out? He has not, or we should have heard him."
Thorin	"and we know that still; and I still think that when we have won it will be time enough to think what to do about it. As for your share, Mr. Baggins, I assure you we are more than grateful and you shall choose you own fourteenth, as soon as we have anything to divide, am sorry if you are worried about transport, and I admit the difficulties are great-the lands have not become less wild with the passing of time, rather the reverse-but we will do whatever we can for you, and take our share of the cost when the time comes. Believe me or not as you like!"
Arkenstone	"It was like a globe with a thousand facets; it shone like silver in the firelight, like water in the sun, like snow under the stars, like rain upon the Moon!"
Smaug	's fury. He was breaking rocks to pieces, smashing wall and cliff with the lashings of his huge tail, till their little lofty camping ground, the scorched grass, the thrush'
Thorin	"I must feel the wind on my face soon or die. I think I would rather be smashed by Smaug in the open than suffocate in here!"
Don	't let us take any unnecessary risks!"
Smaug	"Stop playing hide-and-seek! Give me a light, and then eat me if you can catch me!"
Smaug	"He is not at home today (or tonight, or whatever it is), I do believe. If Oin and Gloin have not lost their time tinder-boxes, perhaps we can make a little light, and have a look round before the luck turns."
Kili	's gone out! Someone come and find and help me!"
Thorin	"Certainly not the dragon, or he would not go on squeaking."
Bilbo	"It seems we have got to go and help our burglar."
Balin	"and I am quite willing to go. Anyway I expect it is safe for the moment."
Baggins	"Here is the first payment of your reward! Cast off your old coat and put on this!"
Beorn	's wooden bowls!"
Thorin	"What next? We are armed, but what good has any armour ever been before against Smaug the Dreadful? This treasure is not yet won back. We are not looking for gold yet, but for a way of escape; and we have tempted luck too long!"
Thorin	"Let us go! I will guide you. Not in a thousand years should I forget the ways of this palace."
Thorin	's coming. Though all the old adornments were long mouldered or destroyed, and though all was befouled and blasted with the comings and goings of the monster, Thorin knew every passage and every turn. They climbed long stairs, and turned and went down wide echoing ways, and turned again and climbed yet more stairs, and yet more'
Thror	"the hall of feasting and of council. Not far off now is the Front Gate."
Thorin	"From here it hastens to the Gate. Let us follow it!"
Bilbo	"I never expected to be looking out of this door. And I never expected to be so pleased to see the sun again, and to feel the wind on my face. But, ow! this wind is cold!"
Bilbo	's go somewhere where we can sit quiet for a bit!"
Balin	"And I think I know which way we should go: we ought to make for the old look-out post at the Southwest corner of the Mountain."
Thorin	't call my place a nasty hole! You wait till it has been cleaned and redecorated!"
Bilbo	"In the meanwhile where is he? I would give a good breakfast to know. I hope he is not up on the Mountain looking down at us!"
Don	"I feel as if his eyes were on the back of my head."
Bombur	"There may be drink, but I see no sign of food. A dragon would always be hungry in such parts."
Balin	"here we can now lie hid and sheltered for a while, and can see much without being seen."
Thorin	"We can go no further to-day."
Bard	"we would make him a king. Bard the Dragon-shooter of the line of Girion! Alas that he is lost!"
Bard	"He dived from Esgaroth, when the enemy was slain. I am Bard, of the line of Girion; I am the slayer of the dragon!"
Esgaroth	' go back to his own kingdom-Dale is now freed by his valour, and nothing binders his return. And any that wish can go with him, if they prefer the cold shores under the shadow of the Mountain to the green shores of the lake. The wise will stay here and hope to rebuild our town, and enjoy again in time its peace and riches."
Bard	"Up the Bowman, and down with Moneybags,"
Bard	"why do I get all your blame? For what fault am I to be deposed? Who aroused the dragon from his slumber, I might ask? Who obtained of us rich gifts and ample help, and led us to believe that old songs could come true? Who played on our soft hearts and our pleasant fancies? What sort of gold have they sent down the river to reward us? Dragon-fire and ruin! From whom should we claim the recompense of our damage, and aid for our widows and orphans?"
Bard	" Then even as he was speaking, the thought came into his heart of the fabled treasure of the Mountain lying without guard or owner, and he fell suddenly silent. He thought of the Master'
Elvenking	"Smaug is dead!"
Bard	's messengers found him now marching with many spearmen and bowmen; and crows were gathered thick, above him, for they thought that war was awakening again, such as had not been in those parts for a long age. But the king, when he received the prayers of Bard, had pity, for he was the lord of a good and kindly people; so turning his march, which had at first been direct towards the Mountain, he hastened now down the river to the Long Lake. He had not boats or rafts enough for his host, and they were forced to go the slower way by foot; but great store of goods he sent ahead by water. Still elves are light-footed, and though they were not in these days much used to the marches and the treacherous lands between the Forest and the Lake, their going was swift. Only five days after the death of the dragon they came upon the shores and looked on the ruins of the town. Their welcome was good, as may be expected, and the men and their Master were ready to make any bargain for the future in return for the Elvenking'
Thorin	"The time has gone for the autumn wanderings; and these are birds that dwell always in the land; there are starlings and flocks of finches; and far off there are many carrion birds as if a battle were afoot!"
Bilbo	't suppose the snails have!"
Balin	"but I cannot follow the speech of such birds, it is very quick and difficult. Can you make it out Baggins?"
Bilbo	"but the old fellow seems .very excited."
Ravenhill	't suppose that any of that ancient breed linger here now."
Balin	"Keep watch now, and see what happens!"
Fundin	" he croaked (and Bilbo could understand what he said, for he used ordinary language and not bird-speech). "
Roac	"The thrush, may his feathers never fall, saw him die, and we may trust his words. He saw him fall in battle with the men of Esgaroth the third night back from now at the rising of the moon."
Roac	's son. You and your people shall not be forgotten. But none of our gold shall thieves take or the violent carry off while we are alive. If you would earn our thanks still more, bring us news of any that draw near. Also I would beg of you, if any of you are still young and strong of wing, that you would send messengers to our kin in the mountains of the North, both west from here and east, and tell them of our plight. But go specially to my cousin Dain in the Iron Hills, for he has many people well-armed, and dwells nearest to this place. Bid him hasten!"
Roac	"but I will do what can be done."
Thorin	"We have little time to lose."
Balin	"And their camp is very great. They must have come into the valley under the cover of dusk along both banks of the river."
Thorin	"that come as if in war to the gates of Thorin son of Thrain, King under the Mountain, and what do you desire?"
Thorin	"Who are you that come armed for war to the gates of Thorin son of Thrain, King under the Mountain?"
Thorin	"To the treasure of my people no man has a claim, because Smaug who stole it from us also robbed him of life or home. The treasure was not his that his evil deeds should be amended with a share of it. The price of the goods and the assistance that we received of the Lake-men we will fairly pay-in due time. But nothing will we give, not even a loaf'
Bard	"But you are not dead, and we are not robbers. Moreover the wealthy may have pity beyond right on the needy that befriended them when they were in want. And still my other claims remain unanswered."
Bard	"We will give you time to repent your words. Gather your wisdom ere we return!"
Esgaroth	's son Oakenshield, calling himself the King under the Mountain, and we bid him consider well the claims that have been urged, or be declared our foe. At the least he shall deliver one twelfth portion of the treasure unto Bard, as the dragon-slayer, and as the heir of Girion. From that portion Bard will himself contribute to the aid of Esgaroth; but if Thorin would have the friendship and honour of the lands about, as his sires had of old, then he will give also somewhat of his own for the comfort of the men of the Lake."
Arkenstone	"is worth more than a river of gold in itself, and to me it is beyond price. That stone of all the treasure I name unto myself, and I will be avenged on anyone who finds it and withholds it."
Roac	"'
Thorin	"and they may find their dwelling in the Waste grievous to bear. With my friends behind them and winter upon them, they will perhaps be in softer mood to parley with."
Bombur	"I wish we could have a fire up here as they have in the camp!"
Bilbo	"I am tired of stairs and stone passages. I would give a good deal for the feel of grass at my toes."
Bilbo	"I will wake you at midnight, and you can wake the next watchman."
Bilbo Baggins	't know me to look at. But Bard will remember me, and it is Bard I particularly want to see."
Bilbo	" He drew from a pocket in his old jacket (which he still wore over his mail), crumpled and much folded, Thorin'
Bard	"Such a fool deserves to starve."
Bilbo	"I see your point of view. At the same time winter is coming on fast. Before long you will be having snow and what not, and supplies will be difficult - even for elves I imagine. Also there will be other difficulties. You have not heard of Dain and the dwarves of the Iron Hills?"
Dain	' march off, and has at least five hundred grim dwarves with him - a good many of them have had experience in the dreadful dwarf and goblin wars, of which you have no doubt heard. When they arrive there may be serious trouble."
Bard	't be so hasty! I never met such suspicious folk! I am merely trying to avoid trouble for all concerned. Now I will make you an offer!!"
Bilbo	"the Heart of the Mountain; and it is also the heart of Thorin. He values it above a river of gold. I give it to you. It will aid you in your bargaining."
Bilbo Baggins	"You are more worthy to wear the armour of elf-princes than many that have looked more comely in it. But I wonder if Thorin Oakenshield will see it so. I have more knowledge of dwarves in general than you have perhaps. I advise you to remain with us, and here you shall be honoured and thrice welcome."
Bilbo	't think I ought to leave my friends like this, after all we have gone through together. And I promised to wake old Bombur at midnight, too! Really I must be going, and quickly."
Bilbo	"There is always more about you than anyone expects!"
Gandalf	"Things are drawing towards the end now, unless I am mistaken. There is an unpleasant time just in front of you; but keep your heart up! You may come through all right. There is news brewing that even the ravens have not heard. Good night!"
Dain	"They will have got wind of his coming. I thought that would alter their mood! Bid them come few in number and weaponless, and I will hear,"
Bard	"Are you still of the same mind?"
Thorin	"Is there then nothing for which you would yield any of your gold?"
Thorin	"But how came you by the heirloom of my house-if there is need to ask such a question of thieves?"
Bard	"Your own we will give back in return for our own."
Thorin	"You miserable hobbit! You undersized-burglar!"
Gandalf	't damage him. Put him down, and listen first to what he has to say!"
Bilbo	"Never again will I have dealings with any wizard or his friends. What have you to say, you descendant of rats?"
Bilbo	"I am sure this is all very uncomfortable. You may remember saying that I might choose my own fourteenth share? Perhaps I took it too literally -1 have been told that dwarves are sometimes politer in word than in deed. The time was, all the same, when you seemed to think that I had been of some service. Descendant of rats, indeed! Is this ail the service of you and your family that I was promised. Thorin? Take it that I have disposed of my share as I wished, and let it go at that!"
Thorin	" he said. "
Bilbo	"or I will throw you down."
Gandalf	"But things may change yet."
Thorin	"You have mail upon you, which was made by my folk, and is too good for you. It cannot be pierced .by arrows; but if you do not hasten, I will sting your miserable feet. So be swift!"
Bard	"We will give you until tomorrow. At noon we will return, and see if you have brought from the hoard the portion that is to be set against the stone. If that is done without deceit, then we will depart, and the elf-host will go back to the Forest. In the meanwhile farewell!"
Dain	"You have no business here. We are going on, so make way or we shall fight you!"
Bard	's arm! They do not understand war above ground, whatever they may know of battle in the mines. There are many of our archers and spearmen now hidden in the rocks upon their right flank. Dwarf-mail may be good, but they will soon be hard put to it. Let us set on them now from both sides, before they are fully rested!"
Elvenking	"Long will I tarry, ere I begin this war for gold. The dwarves cannot press us, unless we will, or do anything that we cannot mark. Let us hope still for something that will bring reconciliation. Our advantage in numbers will be enough, if in the end it must come to unhappy blows."
Gandalf	"Dread has come upon you all! Alas! it has come more swiftly than I guessed. The Goblins are upon you! Bolg* of the North is coming. O Dain! whose father you slew in Moria. Behold! the bats are above his army like a sea of locusts. They ride upon wolves and Wargs are in their train!"
Gandalf	"There is yet time for council. Let Dain son of Nain come swiftly to us!"
Bard	"To the Mountain! Let us take our places while there is yet time!"
Bard	's feet black with a hurrying multitude. Ere long the vanguard swirled round the spur'
Ravenhill	"before the goblins win the Gate, and we are all slaughtered or driven down and captured. Really it is enough to make one weep, after all one has gone through. I would rather old Smaug had been left with all the wretched treasure, than that these vile creatures should get it, and poor old Bombur, and Balin and Fili and Kili and all the rest come to a bad end; and Bard too, and the Lake-men and the merry elves. Misery me! I have heard songs of many battles, and I have always understood that defeat may be glorious. It seems very uncomfortable, not to say distressing. I wish I was well out of it."
Bilbo	"This invisibility has its drawbacks after all. Otherwise I suppose I might have spent a warm and comfortable night in bed!"
Bilbo	"But I have a helm and a hard skull. All the same I feel sick and my legs are like straws."
Bilbo	"You are called for;"
Thorin	"I have brought him."
Bilbo	"This is a bitter adventure, if it must end so; and not a mountain of gold can amend it. Yet I am glad that I have shared in your perils - that has been more than any Baggins deserves."
Thorin	"There is more in you of good than you know, child of the kindly West. Some courage and some wisdom, blended in measure. If more of us valued food and cheer and song above hoarded gold, it would be a merrier world. But sad or merry, I must leave it now. Farewell!"
Bilbo	"that I woke up when I did. I wish Thorin were living, but I am glad that we parted in kindness. You are a fool, Bilbo Baggins, and you made a great mess of that business with the stone; and there was a battle, in spite of all your efforts to buy peace and quiet, but I suppose you can hardly be blamed for that."
Beorn	's shape; and he seemed to have grown almost to giant-size in his wrath. The roar of his voice was like drums and guns; and he tossed wolves and goblins from his path like straws and feathers. He fell upon their rear, and broke like a clap of thunder through the ring. The dwarves were making a stand still about their lords upon a low rounded hill. Then Beorn stooped and lifted Thorin, who had fallen pierced with spears, and bore him out of the fray. Swiftly he returned and his wrath was redoubled, so that nothing could withstand him, and no weapon seemed to bite upon him. He scattered the bodyguard, and pulled down Bolg himself and crushed him. Then dismay fell on the Goblins and they fled in all directions. But weariness left their enemies with the coming of new hope, and they pursued them closely, and prevented most of them from escaping where they could. They drove many of them into the Running River, and such as fled south or west they hunted into the marshes about the Forest River; and there the greater part of the last fugitives perished, while those that came hardly to the Wood-elves'
Bilbo	"perhaps I shall see them on the way home. I suppose I shall be going home soon?"
Bard	"We will honour the agreement of the dead, and he has now the Arkenstone in his keeping."
Bard	"This treasure is as much yours as it is mine; though old agreements cannot stand, since so many have a claim in its winning and defence. Yet even though you were willing to lay aside all your claim, I should wish that the words of Thorin, of which he repented, should not prove true: that we should give you little. I would reward you most richly of all."
Bilbo	't know what I should have done with it when I got home. I am sure it is better in your hands."
Bifur	"Farewell Thorin Oakenshield! And Fili and Kili! May your memory never fade!"
Balin	"If ever you visit us again, when our halls are made fair once more, then the feast shall indeed be splendid!"
Bilbo	't wait to knock! Tea is at four; but any of you are welcome at any time!"
Gandalf	"Merry be the greenwood, while the world is yet young! And merry be all your folk!"
Gandalf	"May you ever appear where you are most needed and least expected! The oftener you appear in my halls the better shall I be pleased!"
Bilbo	"to accept this gift!"
Bilbo	"that, er, some little return should be made for your, er, hospitality. I mean even a burglar has his feelings. I have drunk much of your wine and eaten much of your bread."
Bilbo	"And I name you elf-friend and blessed. May your shadow never grow less (or stealing would be too easy)! Farewell!"
Bilbo	's bidding. The goblins of the Misty Mountains were now few and terrified, and hidden in the deepest holes they could find; and the Wargs had vanished from the woods, so that men went abroad without fear. Beorn indeed became a great chief afterwards in those regions and ruled a wide land between the mountains and the wood; and it is said that for many generations the men of his line had the power of taking bear'
Bilbo	"I wish now only to be in my own arm-chair!"
Gandalf	"The Forest will grow somewhat more wholesome. The North will be freed from that horror for many long years, I hope. Yet I wish he were banished from the world!"
Elrond	"but I fear that will not come about in this age of the world, or for many after."
Bilbo	"What time by the moon is this? Your lullaby would waken a drunken goblin! Yet I thank you."
Elrond	"but I will take all the cure I can get. A second good night, fair friends!"
Bilbo	"But our back is to legends and we are coming home. I suppose this is a first taste of it."
Bilbo	"You had better take this, Gandalf. I daresay you can find a use for it."
Bilbo	"Something is the matter with you! You are not the hobbit that you were."
Bilbo	's going on?"
Bilbo Baggins	"Presumed Dead,"
Bilbo	"Poor old Baggins!"
Bilbo	's Holiday"
Bilbo	' waistcoat was more extensive (and had real gold buttons), Bilbo also noticed that Balm'
Balin	"and very popular, for, of course, he gets most of the credit for the present prosperity. They are making songs which say that in his day the rivers run with gold."
Gandalf	't really suppose, do you, that all your adventures and escapes were managed by mere luck, just for your sole benefit? You are a very fine person, Mr. Baggins, and I am very fond of you; but you are only quite a little fellow in a wide world after all!"
