Anórien	'In the realm of Gondor,'
Pippin	'What is that?'
Pippin	'It is long since the beacons of the North were lit,'
Frodo	'Sleep again, and do not be afraid!'
Frodo	'You do not comfort me,'
North	'Yea truly, we know you, Mithrandir,'
Isengard	'I will vouch for him before the seat of Denethor,'
Ingold	'Man?'
Pippin	'Man!'
Ingold	'Many a doer of great deeds might say no more,'
Gandalf	'A Halfling,'
North	'Yes, and one who journeyed with him,'
Gandalf	'Peace!'
Ingold	'It has been guessed already,'
Pippin	'Hobbit,'
Ingold	'Fare you well!'
Gandalf	'Because I come seldom but when my help is needed,'
Rohan	'The work will be finished ere evening,'
Gandalf	'It is upon you,'
Shadowfax	'Surely that is one of the great steeds of the King of Rohan? Maybe the Rohirrim will come soon to strengthen us.'
Pippin	'Why not? What is wrong with Strider?'
Gandalf	'Maybe, maybe,'
Pippin	'Kingship?'
Gandalf	'Yes,'
Mithrandir	'Dark indeed is the hour,'
Théoden	'It is,'
Faramir	'Yet a Halfling still,'
Gandalf	'He would have gone,'
Denethor	'I have received this,'
Pippin	'That is the horn that Boromir always wore!'
Mardil	'Verily,'
Pippin	'Thirteen, thirteen days,'
Pippin	'So,'
Meriadoc	'The mightiest man may be slain by one arrow,'
Pippin	'Little service, no doubt, will so great a lord of Men think to find in a hobbit, a halfling from the northern Shire; yet such as it is, I will offer it, in payment of my debt.'
North	'Whence came this?'
Pippin	'It came out of the mounds that lie on the borders of my country '
Denethor	'I see that strange tales are woven about you,'
Gandalf	'Take the hilt,'
Pippin	'I am,'
Pippin	'And now,'
Denethor	'Bring wine and food and seats for the guests,'
Gandalf	'It is all that I have to spare, for there is much else to heed,'
Isengard	'And earlier, it is to be hoped,'
Pippin	'It is much to me. But I know already sufficient of these deeds for my own counsel against the menace of the East.'
Gandalf	'How much older?'
Stone	'Yea,'
Denethor	'Now tell me your tale, my liege,'
Peregrin	'Lead the Lord Mithrandir to the housing prepared for him,'
Gandalf	'Folly?'
Gondor	'If you understand it, then be content,'
Steward	'Unless the king should come again?'
Pippin	'You did indeed!'
Pippin	'Indeed you did your best,'
Peregrin	'Well, no need to brood on what tomorrow may bring. For one thing, tomorrow will be certain to bring worse than today, for many days to come. And there is nothing more that I can do to help it. The board is set, and the pieces are moving. One piece that I greatly desire to find is Faramir, now the heir of Denethor. I do not think that he is in the City; but I have had no time to gather news. I must go. Pippin. I must go to this lords'
Shadowfax	'I am in haste Pippin,'
Pippin	'Nine o'
Pippin	'You are Peregrin the Halfling?'
Pippin	'Well,'
Beregond	'Aragorn?'
Rohan	'Oh,'
Pippin	'Er well,'
Pippin	'Well, yes, to speak in courtesy, yes,'
Pippin	'At the table small men may do the greater deeds, we say. But you have broken your fast as well as any man in the Citadel, and with greater honour. This is a fortress and a tower of guard and is now in posture of war. We rise ere the Sun, and take a morsel in the grey light, and go to our duties at the opening hour. But do not despair!'
Rohan	'One moment!'
Beregond	'Hobbit?'
Pippin	'That is what we call ourselves,'
Beregond	'I am glad to learn it,'
Pippin	'Good morning!'
Beregond	'He looks as if he were spoiling for a race, and not newly come from a great journey,'
Pippin	'None is rich and fair enough for him,'
Pippin	'And now for our manger,'
Beregond	'This is the storehouse and buttery of my company of the Guard.'
Beregond	'I will not hide from you, Master Peregrin,'
Pippin	'I do,'
Beregond	'That is the road to the vales of Tumladen and Lossarnach, and the mountain-villages, and then on to Lebennin,'
Anduin	'What can I see there?'
Osgiliath	'It was a city,'
Pippin	'The Black Riders?'
Beregond	'Yes, they were black,'
Pippin	'I know of them,'
Osgiliath	'So near to Mordor?'
Pippin	'When?'
Beregond	'Only because everything is now ready,'
Faramir	'It is over-late to send for aid when you are already besieged,'
Isengard	'And yet'
Beregond	'What was that?'
Pippin	'Yes,'
Beregond	'Yes, the shadow of doom,'
Gandalf	'It is passed,'
Beregond	'Rightly said!'
Rohan	'All the same, I wish it was over for good or ill.'
Faramir	'Ah, there you lay your finger on the sore that many feel!'
Gandalf	'Alas! my own hand feels as light as a feather,'
Beregond	'Will you come with me?'
Rohan	'I shall be glad to come,'
Peregrin	'Nay, nay,'
Pippin	'Then it is far beyond me,'
Gandalf	'wary'
Pippin	'I was,'
Tuckborough	'Which question shall I answer first?'
Iorlas	'Twenty-nine!'
Pippin	'Maybe you could, if I let you,'
Pippin	'No!'
Pippin	'So I thought,'
Bergil	'Then why did you not say so at once?'
Pippin	'His message is less bad than that, if not good.'
Bergil	'That is good!'
Pippin	'Forlong! Forlong!'
Forlong	'Forlong has come,'
Forlong	'Forlong!'
Bergil	'So it will, if I have not returned before the sundown-bells,'
Bergil	'Farewell for this time,'
Beregond	'Can you find your way?'
Pippin	'Hullo!'
Gandalf	'But the night will be too short,'
Legolas	'And then whither?'
Rohan	'I cannot say yet,'
Legolas	'I for one!'
Merry	'Don'
Merry	'Yes,'
Rohan	's stirrup. Éomer and his esquire rode back to the rear. Merry felt more like unneeded baggage than ever, and he wondered, if there was a fight, what he should do. Supposing the king'
Éomer	'You have found it,'
Rohan	'Halbarad Dúnadan, Ranger of the North I am,'
Merry	'And you have found him also!'
Halbarad	'All is well,'
Elladan	'I have thirty with me,'
Elrohir	'That will soon be seen,'
Halbarad	'It is a gift that I bring you from the Lady of Rivendell,'
North	'Now I know what you bear. Bear it still for me a while!'
Legolas	'The Sun is high,'
Merry	'There was a battle here three nights ago,'
Halbarad	'In a high chamber of the Burg,'
Rohan	'They are a strange company, these newcomers,'
Elladan	'But even as Aragorn they are courteous, if they break their silence.'
Merry	'Why have they come? Have you heard?'
Rohan	'They answered a summons, as you heard,'
Grey	'Nay, Galadriel,'
Wood	'Yes, you have it,'
Théoden	'It is not as I would have it,'
Merry	'May I?'
Éomer	'I doubt it not,'
Éomer	'There are no great weapon-hoards here, lord.'
Merry	'I have a sword,'
Rohan	'Gladly will I take it,'
Merry	'As a father you shall be to me,'
Théoden	'For a little while,'
Théoden	'We will make ready to ride,'
Théoden	'I am troubled in mind, lord,'
Éomer	'It is now a full hour past noon,'
Rohan	'Three days,'
Éomer	'The Paths of the Dead!'
Éomer	'Alas! Aragorn my friend!'
Éomer	'That road I will take, nonetheless,'
Théoden	'You will do as you will, my lord Aragorn,'
Merry	'Farewell, lord!'
Merry	'Good-bye!'
Halbarad	'A little people, but of great worth are the Shire-folk,'
Legolas	'And now our fates are woven together,'
Legolas	'Come!'
Stone	'A struggle somewhat grimmer for my part than the battle of the Hornburg,'
Gandalf	'You have looked in that accursed stone of wizardry!'
Stone	'You forget to whom you speak,'
Gimli	'But he wields great dominion, nonetheless,'
Stone	'The hasty stroke goes oft astray,'
Gimli	'Then lost it must be,'
Rohan	'The Paths of the Dead!'
Elrond	'The living have never used that road since the coming of the Rohirrim,'
Legolas	'And what may be the words of the seer?'
Gimli	'I will go with you even on the Paths of the Dead, and to whatever, end they may lead,'
Legolas	'I also will come,'
Gimli	'I hope that the forgotten people will not have forgotten how to fight,'
Sauron	'That we shall know if ever we come to Erech,'
Hill	'Then Isildur said to their king: “Thou shalt be the last king. And if the West prove mightier than thy Black Master, this curse I lay upon thee and thy folk: to rest never until your oath is fulfilled. For this war will last through years uncounted, and you shall be summoned once again ere the end.” And they fled before the wrath of Isildur, and did not dare to go forth to war on Sauron'
Stone	'Come!'
Dunharrow	'Indeed no man would count such a journey wasted,'
Tom	'Nay, lady,'
Rohirrim	'It is not madness, lady,'
Sauron	'Because I must,'
Eorl	'Too often have I heard of duty,'
Gimli	'My blood runs chill,'
Halbarad	'This is an evil door,'
Sauron	'But we must go in, and therefore the horses must go too,'
Gimli	'Here is a thing unheard of!'
Gimli	'Does he feel no fear?'
Stone	'For that is not my errand!'
Legolas	'The Dead are following,'
Elladan	'Yes, the Dead ride behind. They have been summoned,'
Elladan	'Where in Middle-earth are we?'
Gondor	'The hour is come at last. Now I go to Pelargir upon Anduin, and ye shall come after me. And when all this land is clean of the servants of Sauron, I will hold the oath fulfilled, and ye shall have peace and depart for ever. For I am Elessar, Isildur'
Éomer	'Harrowdale at last!'
Théoden	'This journey is over, maybe,'
Éomer	'But if you would take my counsel,'
Dunharrow	'Nay, my son, for so I will call you, speak not the soft words of Wormtongue in my old ears!'
Gandalf	'At dawn three days ago, lord,'
Théoden	'The winged Shadow?'
Dúnhere	'Maybe, lord,'
Théoden	'It is well,'
Merry	's party came up under the looming cliff on the eastern side of the valley; and there suddenly the path began to climb, and Merry looked up in amazement. He was on a road the like of which he had never seen before, a great work of men'
Théoden	'And you, Éowyn,'
Merry	'All is well,'
Éomer	'So Aragorn has come then,'
Éowyn	'No, he is gone,'
Éomer	'Whither did he go?'
Sun	'I do not know,'
Théoden	'You are grieved, daughter,'
Éowyn	'Yes, lord,'
Éomer	'Then our paths are sundered,'
Dwimorberg	's pavilion. There Merry found that everything was made ready, and that he himself was not forgotten. A little tent had been pitched for him beside the king'
Frodo	'The Paths of the Dead,'
Strider	'Twice now, lord, I have heard of the Paths of the Dead,'
Eorl	'No man knows,'
Éowyn	'Yet it is said in Harrowdale,'
Merry	'Then why has Aragorn gone that way?'
Éomer	'Unless he has spoken words to you as his friend that we have not heard,'
Éowyn	'Greatly changed he seemed to me since I saw him first in the king'
Eorl	'Maybe he was called,'
Éomer	'But how shall a man discover whether that time be come or no, save by daring the Door?'
Gondor	'A man is here, lord,'
Théoden	'Let him come!'
Rohirrim	'Hail Lord of the Rohirrim, friend of Gondor!'
Théoden	'The Red Arrow!'
Rohirrim	'That is best known to yourself, lord,'
Rohan	'What the Lord Denethor may know or guess of all these things I cannot say,'
Théoden	'Dark tidings,'
Eorl	'But we will speak no longer counsels of prudence. We will come. The weapontake was set for the morrow. When all is ordered we will set out. Ten thousand spears I might have sent riding over the plain to the dismay of your foes. It will be less now, I fear; for I will not leave my strongholds all unguarded. Yet six thousands at the least shall ride behind me. For say to Denethor that in this hour the King of the Mark himself will come down to the land of Gondor, though maybe he will not ride back. But it is a long road, and man and beast must reach the end with strength to fight. A week it may be from tomorrow'
Hirgon	'A week!'
Tarry	'At the least we will do that,'
Master Meriadoc	'Go now each to your rest.'
Merry	'I will be ready,'
Merry	'I won'
Merry	'Wake up, wake up. Master Holbytla!'
Merry	'But the Sun has not risen, yet,'
Hirgon	'We have very great store long prepared,'
Théoden	'Then call the heralds, Éomer,'
Éowyn	'I am going to war, Master Meriadoc,'
Merry	'But, but, lord,'
Théoden	'But we ride on horses tall and swift,'
Merry	'Then tie me on to the back of one, or let me hang on a stirrup, or something,'
Stybba	'Rather than that I would bear you with me on Snowmane,'
Éowyn	'Come now, Meriadoc!'
Éowyn	'No mail have we to fit you,'
Master Meriadoc	'Take all these things,'
Merry	's household-men, Riders of renown. Then the king followed with Éomer on his right. He had said farewell to Éowyn above in the Hold, and the memory was grievous; but now he turned his mind to the road that lay ahead. Behind him Merry rode on Stybba with the errand riders of Gondor, and behind them again twelve more of the king'
Théoden	'This is no journey for such steeds as Stybba, as I have told you '
Merry	'As for that, who can tell?'
Théoden	'I received you for your safe-keeping,'
Merry	'Where will wants not, a way opens, so we say,'
Merry	'I do,'
Merry	'Thank you indeed!'
Dernhelm	'Do you not?'
Éomer	'Ride on! Ride on!'
Pippin	'What is the time?'
Gandalf	'Past the second hour,'
Pippin	'You know quite well,'
Denethor	'I will, when I learn what you are fit for,'
Pippin	'Yes,'
Pippin	's heart sank. He did not relish the idea of singing any song of the Shire to the Lord of Minas Tirith, certainly not the comic ones that he knew best; they were too, well, rustic for such an occasion. He was however spared the ordeal for the present. He was not commanded to sing. Denethor turned to Gandalf, asking questions about the Rohirrim and their policies, and the position of Éomer, the king'
Beregond	'You are weary of this day?'
Prince	'Yes,'
Faramir	'Nay,'
Faramir	'Yes,'
Pippin	'Black Riders!'
Faramir	'Faramir! The Lord Faramir! It is his call!'
Gandalf	'Gandalf!'
Faramir	'Faramir!'
Pippin	'He came with me from the land of the Halflings,'
Faramir	'Cirith Ungol? Morgul Vale?'
Faramir	'I parted with them in the morning two days ago,'
Faramir	'Some twenty-five leagues as a bird flies,'
Mithrandir	'Ill?'
Faramir	'If what I have done displeases you, my father,'
Denethor	'Would that have availed to change your judgement?'
Faramir	'So be it,'
Faramir	'So be it!'
Faramir	'Do you wish then,'
Boromir	'Yes, I wish that indeed,'
Ithilien	's restraint gave way. '
Denethor	'Stir not the bitterness in the cup that I mixed for myself,'
Gandalf	'Comfort yourself!'
Mithrandir	'You found Boromir less apt to your hand, did you not?'
Gandalf	'What then is your wisdom?'
Gandalf	'You think, as is your wont, my lord, of Gondor only,'
Denethor	'And where will other men look for help, if Gondor falls?'
Gandalf	'Nonetheless I do not trust you,'
Faramir	'If I had! If you had!'
Faramir	'It is not strong,'
Denethor	'Not enough, I deem,'
Faramir	'There and elsewhere in many places,'
Denethor	'You are weary, I see,'
Faramir	'Let us not speak of that!'
Tom	'Then we will not,'
Frodo	'Tell me,'
Faramir	's head. '
Rohan	'Maybe,'
Pippin	'But,'
Gandalf	'But what?'
Faramir	'Gollum,'
Frodo	'I cannot answer that now,'
Rohan	'They give him no rest,'
Rammas	'Yet,'
Faramir	'That was but a trial,'
Faramir	'And what of Cair Andros?'
Denethor	'Much must be risked in war,'
Denethor	'I do so,'
Faramir	'Then farewell!'
Denethor	'That depends on the manner of your return,'
Faramir	'Do not throw your live away rashly or in bitterness,'
Gandalf	'Yes, he will come,'
Osgiliath	'If he wins back at all across the Pelennor, his enemies will be on his heels,'
Pippin	'Then I am needed there more than here,'
Beregond	'Where is Faramir?'
Gandalf	'No,'
Pippin	'Not - the Dark Lord?'
Sauron	'Yet now under the Lord of Barad-dûr the most fell of all his captains is already master of your outer walls,'
Denethor	'Then, Mithrandir, you had a foe to match you,'
Howe	'It might be so,'
Denethor	'And we also have few. Now would the coming of Rohan be in the nick of time,'
Gandalf	'We are likely to see other newcomers first,'
Denethor	'Some have accused you, Mithrandir, of delighting to bear ill news,'
Faramir	'Amroth for Gondor!'
Faramir	'Faramir! Faramir!'
Anórien	'There is no news of the Rohirrim,'
Rohan	'Nay,'
Gandalf	'Do not weep, lord,'
Denethor	'Comfort me not with wizards!'
Grey	'Nay, I will not come down,'
Anduin	's hearts would lift again, and the winged shadows pass from memory. Tirelessly he strode from Citadel to Gate, from north to south about the wall; and with him went the Prince of Dol Amroth in his shining mail. For he and his knights still held themselves like lords in whom the race of Númenor ran true. Men that saw them whispered saying: '
Steward	'The first circle of the City is burning, lord,'
Faramir	'Why? Why do the fools fly?'
Pippin	'He is burning, already burning,'
Peregrin	'Farewell!'
Pippin	'I will not say farewell, my lord,'
Faramir	'Do as you will, Master Halfling,'
Faramir	'By your leave, lord!'
Faramir	'Your master is not himself,'
Grey	'Who is the master of Minas Tirith?'
Pippin	'The Grey Wanderer or no one, it would seem,'
Pippin	'To find Mithrandir,'
Faramir	'The Lord'
Pippin	'Yes,'
Pippin	'No,'
Pippin	'Well, you must choose between orders and the life of Faramir,'
Gandalf	'You cannot enter here,'
Éomer	's command, to stay behind. He wondered, too, if the old King knew that he had been disobeyed and was angry. Perhaps not. There seemed to be some understanding between Dernhelm and Elfhelm, the Marshal who commanded the éored in which they were riding. He and all his men ignored Merry and pretended not to hear if he spoke. He might have been just another bag that Dernhelm was carrying. Dernhelm was no comfort: he never spoke to anyone. Merry felt small, unwanted, and lonely. Now the time was anxious, and the host was in peril. They were less than a day'
Elfhelm	'Anything that can keep so in this devil'
Merry	'Is the enemy coming then?'
Drúadan	'Nay, nay,'
Stone	'No, father of Horse-men,'
Éomer	'But our need is for aid in battle,'
Stone	'Bring news,'
Éomer	'How do you know that?'
Ghân-buri-Ghân	's flat face and dark eyes showed nothing, but his voice was sullen with displeasure. '
Théoden	'Alas! he speaks all too shrewdly,'
Éomer	'And yet we need great haste,'
Dîn	'Let Ghân-buri-Ghân finish!'
Ghân-buri-Ghân	'We will receive your offer,'
Ghân-buri-Ghân	'Dead men are not friends to living men, and give them no gifts,'
Théoden	'So be it!'
Éomer	'How long will it take to pass by the enemy and come back to the road?'
Dîn	'Wild Men go quick on feet,'
Éomer	'Then we must allow at least seven hours for the leaders,'
Théoden	'Who knows?'
Sun	'It is all dark, but it is not all night.'
Éomer	'Then we must set out as soon as may be,'
Dîn	'Wild Men say many things '
Éomer	'Good tidings!'
Théoden	'Once again I thank you, Ghân-buri-Ghân of the woods,'
Ghân	'Kill gorgûn! Kill orc-folk! No other words please Wild Men '
Rohan	'Wind is changing!'
Elfhelm	'We need no further guidance,'
Éomer	'Then since we must look for fell deeds and the need of all our strength,'
Éomer	'Well?'
Théoden	'Alas!'
Éomer	'Need brooks no delay, yet late is better than never,'
Merry	's éored came next; and now Merry noticed that Dernhelm had left his place and in the darkness was moving steadily forward, until at last he was riding just in rear of the king'
Wídfara	'Do you remember the Wild Man'
Théoden	'If you speak truly, Wídfara, then may you live beyond this day in years of blessedness!'
Théoden	'Éomer, my son! You lead the first éored,'
Eorl	'To me! To me!'
Éowyn	'Éowyn! Éowyn!'
Éomer	'Grieve not! It is forgiven. Great heart will not be denied. Live now in blessedness; and when you sit in peace with your pipe, think of me! For never now shall I sit with you in Meduseld, as I promised, or listen to your herb-lore.'
Merry	'Lord, lord,'
Éomer	's mind: '
Éowyn	'Hail, King of the Mark!'
Éowyn	'Let his knights remain here,'
Éowyn	'Éowyn, Éowyn!'
Déorwine	's household they could not yet bring from the field; for seven of the king'
Éomer	'Théoden King,'
Rohirrim	'Surely, here is a woman?'
Éomer	'Nay! One only,'
Belfalas	'The Corsairs of Umbar!'
Hornburg	'Thus we meet again, though all the hosts of Mordor lay between us,'
Éomer	'So you spoke,'
Pippin	'Gandalf, Gandalf! '
Gandalf	'What are you doing here?'
Faramir	'He has,'
Pippin	'But Faramir!'
Gandalf	'Burn him alive?'
Faramir	'Denethor has gone to the Tombs,'
Gandalf	'Maybe I can,'
Gandalf	'You will need every man and more,'
Gandalf	'Darkness is passing,'
Pippin	'Then Beregond has gone,'
Gandalf	'Work of the Enemy!'
Gandalf	'Stay! Stay!'
Beregond	'Haste, haste! Do as I have bidden! Slay me this renegade! Or must I do so myself?'
Rath Dínen	'What is this, my lord?'
Denethor	'Since when has the Lord of Gondor been answerable to thee?'
Faramir	'You may,'
Denethor	'He lies within,'
Gandalf	'He calls,'
Denethor	'He will not wake again,'
Power	'Authority is not given to you, Steward of Gondor, to order the hour of your death,'
Gandalf	'Come!'
Power	'Pride and despair!'
Gandalf	'Such counsels will make the Enemy'
North	'Hope on then!'
Gandalf	'What then would you have,'
Denethor	'I would have things as they were in all the days of my life,'
Gandalf	'To me it would not seem that a Steward who faithfully surrenders his charge is diminished in love or in honour,'
Denethor	'So!'
Gandalf	'Come hither!'
Beregond Faramir	'So passes Denethor, son of Ecthelion,'
Faramir	's Door, and Beregond looked with grief at the porter. '
Gandalf	'The Prince of Dol Amroth is in command in the absence of the Lord,'
Denethor	'My friends,'
Faramir	'Now I understand what seemed so strange to me!'
Beregond	'It was in the very hour that Faramir was brought to the Tower that many of us saw a strange light in the topmost chamber,'
Faramir	'Alas! then I have guessed rightly,'
Éowyn	'Where is the king?'
Merry	'They have gone up into the Citadel,'
Merry	'No,'
Merry	's face was anxious. '
Merry	'It'
Pippin	'Lean on me, Merry lad!'
Merry	'Are you going to bury me?'
Pippin	'No, indeed!'
Pippin	'I'
Bergil	'I am running errands for the Healers,'
Pippin	'Don'
Merry	'I'
Elrond	'He should have been borne in honour into this city,'
North	'Not a beggar,'
Éowyn	's heart, and with it the bite of care and fear renewed, that he said no more, but turned and went swiftly from the hall; and the Prince followed him. And when they came forth evening had fallen and many stars were in the sky. And there came Gandalf on foot and with him one cloaked in grey; and they met before the doors of the Houses of Healing. And they greeted Gandalf and said: '
Faramir	'He is come.'
Strider	'Verily, for in the high tongue of old I am Elessar, the Elfstone, and Envinyatar, the Renewer'
Elrond	'Here I must put forth all such power and skill as is given to me,'
Ioreth	'It is also called kingsfoil,'
Faramir	'Wholesome verily,'
Gandalf	'And if not,'
Faramir	's hand in his, and laid the other hand upon the sick man'
Nazgûl	'He is nearly spent,'
Imrahil	'I drew it forth,'
Black Breath	'Weariness, grief for his father'
Ioreth	'Your pardon lord!'
Gandalf	'Then in the name of the king, go and find some old man of less lore and more wisdom who keeps some in his house!'
Faramir	'It is kingsfoil, Sir,'
Faramir	'It will serve,'
Imloth Melui	'Well now! Who would have believed it?'
Faramir	'I will, lord,'
Imrahil	'Farewell then for a while!'
Wormtongue	'I marvel that you should ask me, lord,'
Gandalf	'My friend,'
Eorl	'Think you that Wormtongue had poison only for Théoden'
Éomer	'I saw also what you saw, Éomer. Few other griefs amid the ill chances of this world have more bitterness and shame for a man'
Éomer	'Awake, Éowyn, Lady of Rohan!'
Éomer	'Éowyn, Éowyn!'
Éomer	'Not long, my sister,'
Mark	' I am strangely weary,'
Éomer	'He is dead,'
Eorl	'That is grievous,'
Éomer	'He lies nearby in this House, and I will go to him,'
Éowyn	'To health?'
Merry	's room, and there they found Aragorn standing by the bed. '
Éowyn	'Do not be afraid,'
Pippin	'Past supper-time now,'
Rohan	'They will indeed,'
Merry	'Good!'
Pippin	'Why not?'
Isengard	'Well,'
Strider	'Well then,'
Dunharrow	'Master Meriadoc,'
Bree	'I am frightfully sorry,'
Merry	'I know that well, or I would not deal with you in the same way '
Longbottom Leaf	'Was there ever any one like him?'
Merry	'No,'
Gandalf	'As for Faramir,'
Elfstone	'The King is come again indeed.'
Rohan	'It is good to learn that they are still alive,'
Wood	'They need more gardens,'
Nimrodel	'Hail, lord!'
Prince	'So it is said in the lore of my land,'
Imrahil	'You will find them in the Houses of Healing, and I will lead you thither,'
Éomer	'It will be enough if you send one to guide us, lord,'
Imrahil	'We will come,'
Legolas	'That is a fair lord and a great captain of men,'
Gimli	'And doubtless the good stone-work is the older and was wrought in the first building,'
Legolas	'Yet seldom do they fail of their seed,'
Legolas	'To that the Elves know not the answer,'
Pelargir	'Look!'
Gimli	'Say not so!'
Merry	'Dull and dreary indeed!'
Strider	'Don'
Gimli	'The Sun may shine here,'
Pippin	'The Paths of the Dead?'
Gimli	'Not willingly,'
Éowyn	'And by the love of him also,'
Gimli	'Alas! I had heart only for myself,'
Lamedon	'Four days and nights, and on into a fifth, we rode from the Black Stone,'
Pelargir	'For my part I heeded them not,'
Sauron	'Strange indeed,'
Gimli	'Beyond the eyes of the Dwarves are such foretellings,'
North	' “Up with your beard, Durin'
Legolas	'Follow what may, great deeds are not lessened in worth,'
Merry	'And that may well befall,'
Legolas	'And I for the folk of the Great Wood,'
Power	'My lords,'
Imrahil	'Then you would have us retreat to Minas Tirith, or Dol Amroth, or to Dunharrow, and there sit like children on sand-castles when the tide is flowing?'
Power	'That would be no new counsel,'
Sauron	'I did so ere I rode from the Hornburg,'
Éomer	'But how is this?'
Gandalf	'He is not yet sure,'
Éomer	'As for myself,'
Imrahil	'As for me,'
Gandalf	'That is true,'
Éomer	'All are weary, and very many have wounds light or grievous,'
Pelargir	'We have not only to reckon with those who fought on this field '
Imrahil	'The Gate is destroyed,'
Gimli	'In Erebor in the Kingdom of Dáin there is such skill,'
Mithrandir	'Surely,'
Gandalf	'No, he will try to trap the fly and take the sting,'
Andúril	'Neither shall we,'
Peregrin	'You are not fit for such a journey,'
Elfstone	'Come, Master Perian!'
Imrahil	'And, maybe,'
Gondor	' But Imrahil said: '
Ringwraith	'It is but a feint,'
Rohan	'Go!'
Gondor	'Come forth!'
Sauron	'I am the Mouth of Sauron.'
Gandalf	'Where such laws hold,'
Sauron	'So!'
Gandalf	'Silence!'
Sauron	'I do not wish to deny them,'
Gandalf	'Name the terms,'
Isengard	'These are the terms,'
Sauron	'Do not bandy words in your insolence with the Mouth of Sauron!'
Sauron	'These we will take!'
Merry	'I wish Merry was here,'
Merry	'This was made for just such an hour,'
Bilbo	's thought hovered. '
Frodo	'The perishing is more likely, and will be a lot easier anyway,'
Merry	'I wonder if they think of us at all,'
Frodo	'I'
Frodo	's company had seemed to be about forty, and Gorbag'
Shelob	'Come on, you miserable sluggard!'
Shagrat	'That'
Sam	'It'
Shagrat	`Well, well!'
Snaga	`You won'
Muzgash	`They won'
Shagrat	'Then you must go. I must stay here anyway. But I'
Snaga	`I'
Shagrat	'That'
Gorbag	`Well, you put his back up, being so high and mighty. And he had more sense than you anyway. He told you more than once that the most dangerous of these spies was still loose, and you wouldn'
Shagrat	`So that'
Sam	`A dead end,'
Sam	`Beyond all towers strong and high,'
Snaga	'All right,'
Frodo	`Frodo! Mr. Frodo, my dear!'
Sam	`You'
Frodo	`I can hardly believe it,'
Frodo	's forehead. `
Frodo	'There'
Frodo	`Only that?'
Frodo	`You won'
Frodo	`Yes, I can walk,'
Frodo	`Yes, they quarrelled, seemingly,'
Frodo	`They'
Frodo	`No, not everything, Mr. Frodo. And it hasn'
Frodo	`You'
Sam	'All right, Mr. Frodo,'
Frodo	`No, no!'
Frodo	'O Sam!'
Frodo	'That'
Frodo	's shoulders. Then unslinging his pack he laid it on the floor. He drew Sting from its sheath. Hardly a flicker was to be seen upon its blade. `
Frodo	`Take care, Sam!'
Sam	'I'
Frodo	`There'
Frodo	`The Morgul-stuff, Gorbag'
Frodo	'What about you, Sam?'
Sam	`Well, Mr. Frodo, I'
Frodo	'I can'
Faramir	`Save me, but so I had!'
Sam	`No, they eat and drink, Sam. The Shadow that bred them can only mock, it cannot make: not real new things of its own. I don'
Faramir	`Well, things are a bit better than you think,'
Frodo	`Well, there'
Frodo	'Not till you'
Sam	`I can'
Shire	'Gilthoniel, A Elbereth!'
Frodo	'Aiya elenion ancalima!'
Frodo	'This won'
Sam	'But we can'
Frodo	'Quick, Sam! Over we go!'
Sam	'Well, here goes, Mr. Frodo,'
Frodo	'Orc-mail doesn'
Frodo	'Now down we go, Sam,'
Sam	'If Shagrat himself was to offer me a glass of water, I'
Frodo	'Don'
Frodo	'Well I never!'
Sam	'It'
Sam	'But we may have some to do,'
Frodo	'Look here, Sam dear lad,'
Frodo	'Don'
Frodo	'You can have my cloak, Mr. Frodo,'
Wood	'That'
Ephel Dúath	'There now, Mr. Frodo, it'
North	'It'
Sam	'Look at it, Mr. Frodo!'
Frodo	'What did I tell you? Something'
Frodo	'Well no, not much, Sam,'
Frodo	's quick spirits sank again at once. He looked at his master anxiously, and he took his hand. '
Frodo	'If ever I see the Lady again, I will tell her!'
Sam	'I didn'
Sam	'I do. But I think we'
Frodo	'This is where we turn aside, Sam,'
Sam	'Orc-gear'
Frodo	'I must rest now, Sam, and sleep if I can.'
Gorgoroth	's bag of Faramir'
Sam	'I don'
Sam	'Well!'
Frodo	'Still we shall have to try,'
Frodo	'I guess what it'
Frodo	'I dare say I shall, if we ever get so far,'
Nazgûl	'I'
Frodo	'Quietly, Sam,'
Frodo	'Yes, I remember. And I wondered how you knew,'
Sam	'I'
Frodo	's ear all that he could find words for of Gollum'
Sam	'Well, I suppose we must be going on again,'
Frodo	'No, not any clear notion, Sam,'
Frodo	'That'
Frodo	'I'
Frodo	'We have come to a dead end, Sam,'
Sam	'Then we must take the road, Mr. Frodo,'
Frodo	'All right, Sam,'
Frodo	's head. Frodo was too weary to debate the matter, and Sam did not tell him that he had drunk the last drop of their water, and eaten Sam'
Frodo	'Well, luck did not let me down,'
Frodo	'That Gollum'
Frodo	'Bless you, Sam!'
Frodo	'But he might do a bit of robbery and murder on his own,'
Frodo	'I feared it, Sam,'
Frodo	'Seems so,'
Frodo	' he muttered gloomily staring at the threatening mountain, '
Cotton	'So that was the job I felt I had to do when I started,'
Sam	'Well, Mr. Frodo,'
Frodo	'I can manage it,'
Frodo	'I'
Sam	'Water, water!'
Sam	'I can'
Sam	's eyes. '
Frodo	'I understand,'
Faramir	'Do you remember that bit of rabbit, Mr. Frodo?'
Frodo	'No, I am afraid not, Sam,'
Cotton	'I'
Gamgee	'Don'
Frodo	'I'
Frodo	'I didn'
Frodo	'Now for it! Now for the last gasp!'
Frodo	'Come, Mr. Frodo!'
Sam	'I don'
Sauron	's Road from Barad-dûr to the Sammath Naur, the Chambers of Fire. Out from the Dark Tower'
Frodo	'Now, now, or it will be too late!'
Sam	'I'
Gamgee	'Help me, Sam! Help me, Sam! Hold my hand! I can'
Sam	's legs dangle. Then he bowed his head and struggled off along the climbing road. It was not as easy a way to take as it had looked at first. By fortune the fires that had poured forth in the great turmoils when Sam stood upon Cirith Ungol had flowed down mainly on the southern and western slopes, and the road on this side was not blocked. Yet in many places it had crumbled away or was crossed by gaping rents. After climbing eastward for some time it bent back upon itself at a sharp angle and went westward fox a space. There at the bend it was cut deep through a crag of old weathered stone once long ago vomited from the Mountain'
Sam	'Look out!'
Sam	'Yes, I must go on,'
Sam	'Now!'
Sam	's hand wavered. His mind was hot with wrath and the memory of evil. It would be just to slay this treacherous, murderous creature, just and many times deserved; and also it seemed the only safe thing to do. But deep in his heart there was something that restrained him: he could not strike this thing lying in the dust, forlorn, ruinous, utterly wretched. He himself, though only for a little while, had borne the Ring, and now dimly he guessed the agony of Gollum'
Sam	'Master!'
Sam	'I have come,'
Frodo	'Well, this is the end, Sam Gamgee,'
Sam	'Master!'
Frodo	'Yes,'
Gandalf	'The realm of Sauron is ended!'
Gandalf	'Twice you have borne me, Gwaihir my friend,'
Gwaihir	'I would bear you,'
Gwaihir	'The North Wind blows, but we shall outfly it,'
Frodo	'I am glad that you are here with me,'
Frodo	'Yes, I am with you, Master,'
Frodo	'Maybe not, Sam,'
Frodo	'Well, Master, we could at least go further from this dangerous place here, from this Crack of Doom, if that'
Frodo	'Very well, Sam. If you wish to go, I'
Frodo	's hand caressed it. He sighed. '
Frodo	'Bless me!'
Master Samwise	'In the land of Ithilien, and in the keeping of the King; and he awaits you.'
Gandalf	'A great Shadow has departed,'
Frodo	'How do I feel?'
Frodo	'Yes, I am all right otherwise,'
Sam	'Noon?'
Sauron	'The fourteenth of the New Year,'
Sam	'The King?'
Gandalf	'The King of Gondor and Lord of the Western Lands,'
Sam	'What shall we wear?'
Frodo	'The clothes that you wore on your way to Mordor,'
Frodo	'What have you got there?'
Frodo	'Yes, I have brought your two treasures. They were found on Sam when you were rescued. The Lady Galadriel'
Strider	'Well, if that isn'
Bree	'Yes, Sam, Strider,'
Frodo	'I do not wish for any sword,'
Gandalf	'Tonight at least you should wear one,'
Merry	'Why, look Mr. Frodo! Look here! Well, if it isn'
Merry	'There are indeed,'
Gimli	'That you certainly are not,'
Sam	'Ent-draughts?'
Frodo	'Weeks indeed,'
Anduin	'And I,'
North	'There are no tidings,'
Faramir	'I do not rightly know,'
Éowyn	'My lord,'
Éowyn	'Do not misunderstand him, lord,'
Faramir	'What would you have me do, lady?'
Faramir	'I myself am in the Warden'
Éomer	'But I do not desire healing,'
Faramir	'It is too late, lady, to follow the Captains, even if you had the strength,'
Faramir	'Alas, not me, lord!'
Faramir	'What do you look for, Éowyn?'
Faramir	'Seven days,'
Faramir	'Yes, we wait for the stroke of doom,'
Faramir	'It reminds me of Númenor,'
Éowyn	'Of Númenor?'
Faramir	'Yes,'
Éowyn	'Then you think that the Darkness is coming?'
Faramir	'No,'
Éowyn	'Then if you will have it so, lady,'
Éowyn	'That I know,'
Rohan	'That is well,'
North	'Then must I leave my own people, man of Gondor?'
Faramir	'I would,'
Éomer	'Yet now that I have leave to depart, I would remain. For this House has become to me of all dwellings the most blessed.'
Elfstone	'Nay, cousin! they are not boys,'
Elendil	'Men of Gondor hear now the Steward of this Realm! Behold! one has come to claim the kingship again at last. Here is Aragorn son of Arathorn, chieftain of the Dúnedain of Arnor, Captain of the Host of the West, bearer of the Star of the North, wielder of the Sword Reforged, victorious in battle, whose hands bring healing, the Elfstone, Elessar of the line of Valandil, Isildur'
Faramir	'This is just a ceremony such as we have in the City, cousin; for he has already entered, as I was telling you; and he said to me-'
Bilbo	'Do you know what this day is that Aragorn speaks of? For we are happy here, and I don'
Gandalf	'As for Bilbo,'
Frodo	'Pippin,'
Sauron	'Not for long now,'
Gondor	'But I shall die,'
Gandalf	'Turn your face from the green world, and look where all seems barren and cold!'
Frodo	'It is true that I wish to go back to the Shire,'
Arwen	'Do you wonder at that, Ring-bearer?'
Frodo	'Then I beg leave to depart soon,'
Faramir	'In seven days we will go,'
Gimli	'Nay, lord,'
Éomer	'You shall judge,'
Gimli	'Well, lord,'
Éomer	'Alas!'
Gimli	'Then I must go for my axe,'
Éomer	'But first I will plead this excuse,'
Eorl	's House upon white horses rode round about the barrow and sang together a song of Théoden Thengel'
Éomer	's Deep when the Mark was overrun; and so ended the nine mounds of the west-side, for in that time the line was broken, and after came the mounds of the east-side: Fréalaf, Helm s sister-son, and Léofa, and Walda, and Folca, and Folcwine, and Fengel, and Thengel, and Théoden the latest. And when Théoden was named Éomer drained the cup. Then Éowyn bade those that served to fill the cups, and all there assembled rose and drank to the new king, crying: '
Éomer	'Thus,'
Gondor	'No niggard are you, Éomer,'
Eorl	'This is an heirloom of our house,'
Gandalf	'Welcome to the Treegarth of Orthanc!'
Gandalf	'To see how your work goes, my friend,'
North	'Hoom, well, that is fair enough,'
Gandalf	'The New Age begins,'
Gandalf	'Then why did he stay to listen? Did you go into Orthanc?'
Gandalf	'l observe, my good Fangorn,'
Gandalf	'No, not dead, so far as I know,'
Gandalf	'You may be right,'
Quickbeam	'It is locked,'
Wood	's face became sad. '
Celeborn	'It is far to go. And there are too many Men there in these days. But I am forgetting my manners! Will you stay here and rest a while? And maybe there are some that would be pleased to pass through Fangorn Forest and so shorten their road home?'
Legolas	'Come, Gimli!'
Gimli	'We will come, if our own lords allow it,'
Galadriel	'I do not know, Eldest.'
Pippin	'I wish we could have a Stone that we could see all our friends in,'
Peregrin	'Only one now remains that you could use,'
Gandalf	'Well Saruman!'
Gandalf	'You know the answers,'
Saruman	'Then all the À more reason to have left sooner,'
Gandalf	'Then once more you are going the wrong way,'
Saruman	'To me?'
Galadriel	'Saruman,'
Saruman	'If it be truly the last, I am glad,'
Gandalf	'Then leave him!'
Frodo	'I would, if I had any,'
Isengard	'You can have what I have got left,'
Saruman	'Mine, mine, yes and dearly bought!'
Merry	'Thank you!'
Wormtongue	'One thief deserves another,'
Rohan	'Well, I like that!'
Sam	'Ah!'
Frodo	'I'
Gandalf	'Yes, I think you had better do that,'
Wood	'Well, Mr. Frodo, we'
Frodo	'Yes, something of everything, Sam, except the Sea,'
Frodo	'Well, if you must go, you must,'
Sam	'Almost the last drop of the Smaug vintage,'
Merry	'I have nothing much to give to you young fellows,'
Pippin	'But if you want to beat the Old Took,'
Frodo	'Think of me when you smoke them!'
Frodo	'I have lost it, Bilbo dear,'
Bilbo	'What a pity!'
Frodo	'I don'
Frodo	'You see, I am getting so sleepy,'
Frodo	'Of course I'
Bilbo	'Thank you, my dear fellow!'
Frodo	'Are you in pain, Frodo?'
Frodo	'Well, yes I am,'
Gandalf	'Alas! there are some wounds that cannot be wholly cured,'
Frodo	'I fear it may be so with mine,'
Gandalf	'And there you'
Barliman	'Gone,'
Bill	'Good evening to you!'
Pippin	'Do you think you killed him with that apple, Sam?'
Pippin	'I'
Butterbur	'Oh have they? I'
Strider	'Nob, you woolly-pated ninny!'
Butterbur	'Now I won'
Gandalf	'That is just what we should like, too,'
Butterbur	'Well, if you'
Bree	'Southlinch,'
Baggins	'You don'
Green	'No one comes nigh Bree now from Outside,'
Gandalf	'I will indeed,'
Butterbur	'Three and two,'
Pippin	'Well, no one troubled us,'
Butterbur	'Ah, that you haven'
Butterbur	'How long will that be?'
Barliman	'I expect it has,'
Bree	'If there'
Grey	'You will be let alone, Barliman,'
Butterbur	'Up away by Deadmen'
Norbury	'The Rangers go there,'
Butterbur	'Well, that sounds more hopeful, I'
Gandalf	'He will,'
Butterbur	'Does he now?'
Sam	'Ah!'
Strider	'Of course he does. He'
Strider	's face was a study in wonder. The eyes in his broad face grew round, and his mouth opened wide, and he gasped. '
Gandalf	'Better times, for Bree at any rate,'
Butterbur	'I hope so, I'
Merry	'Not another letter you'
Bill	'Now, now, Mr. Brandybuck, don'
Bill	'What! My Bill?'
Bree	'Not yet,'
Shire	'Well, good luck on your road, and good luck to your home-coming! said Mr. Butterbur. '
Frodo	'I wonder what old Barliman was hinting at,'
Sam	'I can guess some of it,'
Merry	'And something'
Pippin	'Whatever it is,'
Gandalf	'Deep in, but not at the bottom,'
Merry	'Well, we'
Gandalf	'I am with you at present,'
Gandalf	'As well as ever, you may be sure,'
Merry	'But there aren'
Gandalf	'There weren'
Merry	'Well here we are, just the four of us that started out together,'
Frodo	'Not to me,'
Shire	'Of course we can'
Merry Brandybuck	'Come along!'
Merry	'Bless me! It'
Merry	'Then stop gaping at me through the bars, and open the gate!'
Merry	'I'
Frodo	'Chief? Chief? Do you mean Mr. Lotho?'
Baggins	'Do you indeed!'
Merry	'We shall wake him up in a way that will surprise him,'
Merry	'Bill Ferny,'
Merry	'Give me the key!'
Sam	'Neat work, Bill,'
Merry	'So much for your Big Man,'
Merry	'What'
Pippin	'Oh come!'
Sarn Ford	'There isn'
Sam	'All right, all right!'
Frodo	'Chief'
Frodo	'What'
Shire	'You'
Frodo	'And what else?'
Tom	'I can add some more, if you like it,'
Frodo	'Don'
Frodo	'I won'
Baggins	'I can'
Frodo	'All right,'
Frodo	'Look here, Cock-robin!'
Robin	'They'
Sam	'You ought to be ashamed of yourself having anything to do with such nonsense,'
Sam	'But you can give it up, stop Shirriffing, if it has stopped being a respectable job,'
Robin	'We'
Sam	'If I hear not allowed much oftener,'
Will Whitfoot	'Can'
Frogmorton	'Then why do you do their work far them?'
Shirriffs	'No one did. We stay here in the big Shirriff-house. We'
Frodo	'He won'
Merry	'get-up'
Merry	'Leader!'
Merry	'Now get on!'
Merry	'Well, come along in your own time!'
Green	'Good-bye, Cock-robin!'
Pippin	'We shall break a good many things yet, and not ask you to answer '
Frodo	'I'
Merry	'We ought to find out first what we'
Sam	'Like that friend of Bill Ferny'
Merry	'Like many that I saw at Isengard,'
Shirriffs	'Where d'
Merry	'Coming along nicely,'
Sharkey	'Garn, what did I say?'
Merry	'And what difference would that have made, pray?'
Sharkey	'Footpads, eh?'
Frodo	'And what may that be?'
Sharkey	'This country wants waking up and setting to rights,'
Frodo	'Indeed. I am glad to hear of your plans,'
Sharkey	'Lotho! He knows all right. Don'
Isengard	'Yes, I see,'
Frodo	'A beggar in the wilderness!'
Gondor	'little cock-a-whoop'
Merry	'Go!'
Merry	'Well, we'
Frodo	'Not a day too soon. Perhaps too late, at any rate to save Lotho,'
Pippin	'Save Lotho? Whatever do you mean?'
Frodo	'I don'
Pippin	'Well I am staggered!'
Frodo	'Fight?'
Merry	'But if there are many of these ruffians,'
Pippin	'No,'
Cotton	'I'
Merry	'No!'
Pippin	'Do what?'
Merry	'Raise the Shire!'
Rohan	'Sam, you can make a dash for Cotton'
Sam	'Nay! It'
Gamgee	'It'
Sam	'Well!'
Frodo	'That I ain'
Cotton	'Good, good!'
Sam	'What about Mrs. Cotton and Rosie?'
Cotton	'My Nibs is with them. But you can go and help him, if you have a mind,'
Gamgee	'It'
Rosie	'Good evening, Mrs. Cotton!'
Rosie	'Hullo, Sam!'
Cotton	'Perhaps not,'
Cotton	'We'
Frodo	'Well, be off with you!'
Cotton	'Well, what'
Frodo	'I can'
Cotton	'That'
Pippin	'Hobbiton'
Cotton	'No, more'
Merry	'Have they got any weapons?'
Cotton	'Whips, knives, and clubs, enough for their dirty work: that'
Merry	'There you are, Frodo!'
Cotton	'Not exactly,'
Tuckborough	'Good for the Tooks!'
Merry	'See you soon!'
Frodo	'All the same,'
Merry	'All right!'
Frodo	'Very good,'
Cotton	'To Waymeet, that'
Cotton	'Seems almost too easy after all, don'
Merry	'There'
Cotton	'Why not now?'
Bagshot Row	'He'
Cotton	'Thank'
Cotton	'All right, Sam,'
Cotton	'It all began with Pimple, as we call him,'
Shire	'Of course he started with a lot of property in the Southfarthing which he had from his dad; and it seems he'
Mayor	'Then there was a bit of trouble, but not enough. Old Will the Mayor set off for Bag End to protest, but he never got there. Ruffians laid hands on him and took and locked him up in a hole in Michel Delving, and there he is now. And after that, it would be soon after New Year, there wasn'
Merry	'Who is this Sharkey?'
Cotton	'The biggest ruffian o'
Miller	'Take Sandyman'
Lobelia	'That'
Sharkey	' “I'
Bagshot Row	'Good evening. Mr. Baggins!'
Frodo	'I am very sorry, Mr. Gamgee,'
Baggins	'Well, you can'
Frodo	'Perfect satisfaction, Mr. Gamgee,'
Cotton	's household and all his guests were up early next morning. Nothing had been heard in the night, but more trouble would certainly come before the day was old. '
Peregrin	'The Thain has raised all our country,'
Cotton	'Ah! This lot won'
Merry	'Well, you have walked into a trap,'
Pippin	'They won'
Merry	'Yes indeed; the sooner the better,'
Merry	'For it'
Bilbo	'They'
Shire	'Don'
Sandyman	'So I see,'
Frodo	'Don'
Merry	'You are dirty and insolent, Sandyman,'
Merry	'Save your breath!'
Merry	'Where is that miserable Lotho hiding?'
Sam	'This is worse than Mordor!'
Frodo	'Yes, this is Mordor,'
Saruman	'Let'
Saruman	'No doubt, no doubt! But you did not, and so I am able to welcome you home.'
Frodo	'I did not,'
Gandalf	'Quite capable,'
Frodo	'Well, if that is what you find pleasure in,'
Shire	'Kill him!'
Wormtongue	'Worm! Worm!'
Frodo	'No, Sam!'
Frodo	'Wormtongue!'
Lotho	'No evil?'
Saruman	'Then I will,'
Wormtongue	'You do what Sharkey says, always, don'
Sam	'And that'
Merry	'And the very last end of the War, I hope,'
Frodo	'I hope so,'
Sam	'I shan'
Pippin	'You would have done better to come with us after all, poor old Fredegar!'
Pippin	'Who'
Frodo	's arm but still clutching her umbrella, that she was quite touched, and drove away in tears. She had never in her life been popular before. But she was crushed by the news of Lotho'
Michel Delving	'Sharkey'
Frodo	'I wondered when you would think of it,'
Sam	'What can I do with this?'
Pippin	'Throw it in the air on a breezy day and let it do its work!'
Sam	'On what?'
Merry	'Choose one spot as a nursery, and see what happens to the plants there,'
Sam	'But I'
Frodo	'Use all the wits and knowledge you have of your own, Sam,'
North	'leaf'
Frodo	'There is no need to come yet, if you don'
Cotton	'It'
Frodo	'I see,'
Frodo	'What'
Frodo	'Well, Mr. Frodo,'
Frodo	'Well, Sam,'
Frodo	'I suppose you'
Frodo	'You'
Sam	'It will be Bilbo'
Sam	'So he will!'
Frodo	'Well, Sam,'
Sam	'I wish I could go all the way with you to Rivendell, Mr. Frodo, and see Mr. Bilbo,'
Frodo	'Poor Sam! It will feel like that, I am afraid,'
Sam	'Why, you have nearly finished it, Mr. Frodo!'
Frodo	'I have quite finished, Sam,'
Frodo	'If that isn'
Shire	'Well, Master Samwise,'
Frodo	'Yes, I am coming,'
Sam	'Where are you going, Master?'
Frodo	'To the Havens, Sam,'
Shire	'But,'
Gandalf	'You tried to give us the slip once before and failed, Frodo.'
Gandalf	'Yes,'
Gondor	'The land of Anórien is still passing by.'
Pippin	'Look! Fire, red fire! Are there dragons in this land? Look, there is another!'
Gandalf	'On, Shadowfax! We must hasten. Time is short. See! The beacons of Gondor are alight, calling for aid. War is kindled. See, there is the fire on Amon Dîn, and flame on Eilenach; and there they go speeding west: Nardol, Erelas, Min-Rimmon, Calenhad, and the Halifirien on the borders of Rohan.'
Belfalas	'and in the ancient days of Gondor they were not needed, for they had the Seven Stones.'
Gandalf	'For you are not going like Frodo to Mordor, but to Minas Tirith, and there you will be as safe as you can be anywhere in these days. If Gondor falls, or the Ring is taken, then the Shire will be no refuge.'
Mithrandir	'and you know the pass-words of the Seven Gates and are free to go forward. But we do not know your companion. What is he? A dwarf out of the mountains in the North? We wish for no strangers in the land at this time, unless they be mighty men of arms in whose faith and help we can trust.'
Gandalf	'And as for valour, that cannot be computed by stature. He has passed through more battles and perils than you have, Ingold, though you be twice his height; and he comes now from the storming of Isengard, of which we bear tidings, and great weariness is on him, or I would wake him. His name is Peregrin, a very valiant man.'
Pippin	'Man! Indeed not! I am a hobbit and no more valiant than I am a man, save perhaps now and again by necessity. Do not let Gandalf deceive you!'
Ingold	'But what is a hobbit?'
Gandalf	'Not he, yet one of his kindred.'
Pippin	'And Boromir of your City was with us, and he saved me in the snows of the North, and at the last he was slain defending me from many foes.'
Gandalf	'The news of that grief should have been told first to the father.'
Ingold	'for there have been strange portents here of late. But pass on now quickly! For the Lord of Minas Tirith will be eager to see any that bear the latest tidings of his son, be he man or-'
Pippin	'Little service can I offer to your lord, but what I can do, I would do, remembering Boromir the brave.'
Ingold	'But you come with tidings of grief and danger, as is your wont, they say.'
Gandalf	'And as for counsel, to you I would say that you are over-late in repairing the wall of the Pelennor. Courage will now be your best defence against the storm that is at hand - that and such hope as I bring. For not all the tidings that I bring are evil. But leave your trowels and sharpen your swords!'
Ingold	'This is the last portion of the wall to be put in defence: the least open to attack, for it looks towards our friends of Rohan. Do you know aught of them? Will they answer the summons, think you?'
Pippin	' shone out against the sky, glimmering like a spike of pearl and silver, tall and fair and shapely, and its pinnacle glittered as if it were wrought of crystals; and white banners broke and fluttered from the battlements in the morning breeze'
Mithrandir	'Now we know that the storm is indeed nigh!'
Gandalf	'I have ridden on its wings. Let me pass! I must come to your Lord Denethor, while his stewardship lasts. Whatever betide, you have come to the end of the Gondor that you have known. Let me pass!'
Frodo	's errand. I will deal with that in due time. And say nothing about Aragorn either, unless you must.'
Strider	'll be arriving soon himself anyway.'
Gandalf	'Though if he comes, it is likely to be in some way that no one expects, not even Denethor. It will be better so. At least he should come unheralded by us.'
Gandalf	'See, Master Pippin, there is no time to instruct you now in the history of Gondor; though it might have been better, if you had learned something of it, when you were still birds-nesting and playing truant in the woods of the Shire. Do as I bid! It is scarcely wise when bringing the news of the death of his heir to a mighty lord to speak over much of the coming of one who will, if he comes, claim the kingship. Is that enough?'
Gandalf	'If you have walked all these days with closed ears and mind asleep, wake up now!'
Pippin	'and at such times you are wont to come, Mithrandir. But though all the signs forebode that the doom of Gondor is drawing nigh, less now to me is that darkness than my own darkness. It has been told to me that you bring with you one who saw my son die. Is this he?'
Gandalf	'One of the twain. The other is with Théoden of Rohan and may come hereafter. Halflings they are, as you see, yet this is not he of whom the omens spoke.'
Denethor	'and little love do I bear the name, since those accursed words came to trouble our counsels and drew away my son on the wild errand to his death. My Boromir! Now we have need of you. Faramir should have gone in his stead.'
Gandalf	'Be not unjust in your grief! Boromir claimed the errand and would not suffer any other to have it. He was a masterful man, and one to take what he desired. I journeyed far with him and learned much of his mood. But you speak of his death. You have had news of that ere we came?'
Mardil	'What say you to that, Halfling?'
Pippin	'Yes, I think that would be so. Yes, I stood beside him, as he blew the horn. But no help came. Only more orcs.'
Pippin	'You were there? Tell me more! Why did no help come? And how did you escape, and yet he did not, so mighty a man as he was, and only orcs to withstand him?'
Pippin	'and Boromir was pierced by many. When last I saw him he sank beside a tree and plucked a black-feathered shaft from his side. Then I swooned and was made captive. I saw him no more, and know no more. But I honour his memory, for he was very valiant. He died to save us, my kinsman Meriadoc and myself, waylaid in the woods by the soldiery of the Dark Lord; and though he fell and failed, my gratitude is none the less.'
Pippin	' Twitching aside his grey cloak, Pippin drew forth his small sword and laid it at Denethor'
Pippin	'Many, many years lie on it. Surely this is a blade wrought by our own kindred in the North in the deep past?'
Pippin	'But only evil wights dwell there now, and I will not willingly tell more of them.'
Denethor	'and once again it is shown that looks may belie the man - or the halfling. I accept your service. For you are not daunted by words; and you have courteous speech, strange though the sound of it may be to us in the South. And we shall have need of all folk of courtesy, be they great or small, in the days to come. Swear to me now!'
Gandalf	'and speak after the Lord, if you are resolved on this.'
Denethor	'my first command to you: speak and be not silent! Tell me your full tale, and see that you recall all that you can of Boromir, my son. Sit now and begin!'
Denethor	'and see that none trouble us for one hour.'
Gandalf	'Much of more import, it may seem, and yet to me less pressing. But maybe we can speak again at the end of the day.'
Gandalf	'For I have not ridden hither from Isengard, one hundred and fifty leagues, with the speed of wind, only to bring you one small warrior, however courteous. Is it naught to you that Théoden has fought a great battle and that Isengard is overthrown, and that I have broken the staff of Saruman?'
Pippin	' he wondered, and then he thought how odd it was that he had never thought about it before. Treebeard had said something about wizards, but even then he had not thought of Gandalf as one of them. What was Gandalf? In what far time and place did he come into the world, and when would he leave it? And then his musings broke off, and he saw that Denethor and Gandalf still looked each other in the eye, as if reading the other'
Denethor	'For the words of one whom my son so befriended will be welcome indeed.'
Pippin	'I could now eat three breakfasts on end.'
Mithrandir	' said Denethor, '
Mithrandir	's folly run off and then return to my comfort!'
Gandalf	'Nay, my lord, when you are a dotard you will die. You can use even your grief as a cloak. Do you think that I do not understand your purpose in questioning for an hour one who knows the least, while I sit by?'
Gondor	's, unless the king should come again.'
Gandalf	'Well, my lord Steward, it is your task to keep some kingdom still against that event, which few now look to see. In that task you shall have all the aid that you are pleased to ask for. But I will say this: the rule of no realm is mine, neither of Gondor nor any other, great or small. But all worthy things that are in peril as the world now stands, those are my care. And for my part, I shall not wholly fail of my task, though Gondor should perish, if anything passes through this night that can still grow fair or bear fruit and flower again in days to come. For I also am a steward. Did you not know?'
Gandalf	'I did the best I could.'
Pippin	's shoulders and gazing out of the window. Pippin glanced in some wonder at the face now close beside his own, for the sound of that laugh had been gay and merry. Yet in the wizard'
Faramir	' council and learn what I can. But the Enemy has the move, and he is about to open his full game. And pawns are likely to see as much of it as any, Peregrin son of Paladin, soldier of Gondor. Sharpen your blade!'
Pippin	'Do me a favour when you go out. Even before you rest, if you are not too weary. Go and find Shadowfax and see how he is housed. These people are kindly to beasts, for they are a good and wise folk, but they have less skill with horses than some.'
Pippin	'Just the time for a nice breakfast by the open window in spring sunshine. And how I should like breakfast! Do these people ever have it, or is it over? And when do they have dinner, and where?'
Peregrin	' he said. '
Pippin	'I have known of him all my short life, as you might say; and lately I have travelled far with him. But there is much to read in that book, and I cannot claim to have seen more than a page or two. Yet perhaps I know him as well as any but a few. Aragorn was the only one of our Company, I think, who really knew him.'
Beregond	'Who is he?'
Pippin	'he was a man who went about with us. I think he is in Rohan now.'
Pippin	'if I may venture to say so, rather a burning question in my mind at present is, well, what about breakfast and all that? I mean, what are the meal-times, if you understand me, and where is the dining-room, if there is one? And the inns? I looked, but never a one could I see as we rode up, though I had been borne up by the hope of a draught of ale as soon as we came to the homes of wise and courtly men.'
Beregond	'They say that men who go warring afield look ever to the next hope of food and of drink; though I am not a travelled man myself. Then you have not yet eaten today?'
Pippin	'But no more than a cup of wine and a white cake or two by the kindness of your lord; but he racked me for it with an hour of questions, and that is hungry work.'
Pippin	's face. '
Rohan	's eye, I am told, though he has given him to Mithrandir for his services. I think his new master loves the beast better than he loves many men, and if his good will is of any value to this city, you will treat Shadowfax with all honour: with greater kindness than you have treated this hobbit, if it is possible.'
Beregond	'for now I may say that strange accents do not mar fair speech, and hobbits are a fair-spoken folk. But come! You shall make me acquainted with this good horse. I love beasts, and we see them seldom in this stony city; for my people came from the mountain-vales, and before that from Ithilien. But fear not! The visit shall be short, a mere call of courtesy, and we will go thence to the butteries.'
Pippin	'Gandalf will come as soon as he may. He is busy, but he sends greetings, and I am to see that all is well with you; and you resting, I hope, after your long labours.'
Beregond	'How strong and proud he is! Where is his harness? It should be rich and fair.'
Pippin	'He will have none. If he will consent to bear you, bear you he does; and if not, well, no bit, bridle, whip, or thong will tame him. Farewell, Shadowfax! Have patience. Battle is coming.'
Beregond	'It is early yet, but here is a newcomer that the Lord has taken into his service. He has ridden long and far with a tight belt, and has had sore labour this morning, and he is hungry. Give us what you have!'
Peregrin	'that to us you look almost as one of our children, a lad of nine summers or so; and yet you have endured perils and seen marvels that few of our greybeards could boast of. I thought it was the whim of our Lord to take him a noble page, after the manner of the kings of old, they say. But I see that it is not so, and you must pardon my foolishness.'
Pippin	'Though you are not far wrong. I am still little more than a boy in the reckoning of my own people, and it will be four years yet before I “come of age”, as we say in the Shire: But do not bother about me. Come and look and tell me what I can see.'
Beregond	'Few, maybe, of those now sundered will meet again. And there were always too few children in this city; but now there are none-save some young lads that will not depart, and may find some task to do: my own son is one of them.'
Anduin	'Is that another city, or what is it?'
Beregond	'the chief city of Gondor, of which this was only a fortress. For that is the ruin of Osgiliath on either side of Anduin, which our enemies took and burned long ago. Yet we won it back in the days of the youth of Denethor: not to dwell in, but to hold as an outpost, and to rebuild the bridge for the passage of our arms. And then came the Fell Riders out of Minas Morgul.'
Beregond	'and I see that you know something of them, though you have not spoken of them in any of your tales.'
Pippin	'but I will not speak of them now, so near, so near.'
Beregond	'Yes, there it lies. We seldom name it; but we have dwelt ever in sight of that shadow: sometimes it seems fainter and more distant; sometimes nearer and darker. It is growing and darkening now; and therefore our fear and disquiet grow too. And the Fell Riders, less than a year ago they won back the crossings, and many of our best men were slain. Boromir it was that drove the enemy at last back from this western shore, and we hold still the near half of Osgiliath. For a little while. But we await now a new onslaught there. Maybe the chief onslaught of the war that comes.'
Pippin	'Have you a guess? For I saw the beacons last night and the errand-riders; and Gandalf said that it was a sign that war had begun. He seemed in a desperate hurry. But now everything seems to have slowed up again.'
Beregond	'It is but the deep breath before the plunge.'
Beregond	'You also felt something?'
Pippin	'It is the sign of our fall, and the shadow of doom, a Fell Rider of the air.'
Beregond	'I fear that Minas Tirith shall fall. Night comes. The very warmth of my blood seems stolen away.'
Pippin	'No, my heart will not yet despair. Gandalf fell and has returned and is with us. We may stand, if only on one leg, or at least be left still upon our knees.'
Beregond	'Nay, though all things must come utterly to an end in time, Gondor shall not perish yet. Not though the walls be taken by a reckless foe that will build a hill of carrion before them. There are still other fastnesses, and secret ways of escape into the mountains. Hope and memory shall live still in some hidden valley where the grass is green.'
Pippin	't escape is worst of all. What a long day it seems already! I should be happier, if we were not obliged to stand and watch, making no move, striking nowhere first. No stroke would have been struck in Rohan, I think, but for Gandalf.'
Beregond	'But things may change when Faramir returns. He is bold, more bold than many deem; for in these days men are slow to believe that a captain can be wise and learned in the scrolls of lore and song, as he is, and yet a man of hardihood and swift judgement in the field. But such is Faramir. Less reckless and eager than Boromir, but not less resolute. Yet what indeed can he do? We cannot assault the mountains of - of yonder realm. Our reach is shortened, and we cannot strike till some foe comes within it. Then our hand must be heavy!'
Pippin	'A pawn did Gandalf say? Perhaps but on the wrong chessboard.'
Beregond	'You may join my mess for this day. I do not know to what company you will be assigned; or the Lord may hold you at his own command. But you will be welcome. And it will be well to meet as many men as you may, while there is yet time.'
Pippin	'I am lonely, to tell you the truth. I left my best friend behind in Rohan, and I have had no one to talk to or jest with. Perhaps I could really join your company? Are you the captain? If so, you could take me on, or speak for me?'
Beregond	'I am no captain. Neither office nor rank nor lordship have I, being but a plain man of arms of the Third Company of the Citadel. Yet, Master Peregrin, to be only a man of arms of the Guard of the Tower of Gondor is held worthy in the City, and such men have honour in the land.'
Pippin	'Take me back to our room, and if Gandalf is not there, I will go where you like - as your guest.'
Pippin	'wary'
Beregond	' Street. You will find him there with other lads that are remaining in the City. There may be things worth seeing down at the Great Gate ere the closing.'
Pippin	'but they say I have become a man of Gondor.'
Pippin	'My father farms the lands round Whitwell near Tuckborough in the Shire. I am nearly twenty-nine, so I pass you there; though I am but four feet, and not likely to grow any more, save sideways.'
Iorlas	'I wager I could stand you on your head or lay you on your back.'
Pippin	'And maybe I could do the same to you: we know some wrestling tricks in my little country. Where, let me tell you, I am considered uncommonly large and strong; and I have never allowed anyone to stand me on my head. So if it came to a trial and nothing else would serve, I might have to kill you. For when you are older, you will learn that folk are not always what they seem; and though you may have taken me for a soft stranger-lad and easy prey, let me warn you: I am not, I am a halfling, hard, bold, and wicked!'
Pippin	't believe what strangers say of themselves either! I am not a fighter. But it would be politer in any case for the challenger to say who he is.'
Pippin	'for you look like your father. I know him and he sent me to find you.'
Bergil	'Do not tell me that he has changed his mind, and will send me away with the maidens! But no, the last wains have gone.'
Pippin	'He says that if you would prefer it to standing me on my head, you might show me round the City for a while and cheer my loneliness. I can tell you some tales of far countries in return.'
Bergil	'Come then! We were soon going to the Gate to look on. We will go now.'
Bergil	'We boys are no longer allowed to pass the Gate without an elder. Now we shall see better.'
Pippin	'What do they say?'
Forlong	'old Forlong the Fat, the Lord of Lossarnach. That is where my grandsire lives. Hurrah! Here he is. Good old Forlong!'
Forlong	'So few! Two hundreds, what are they? We hoped for ten times the number. That will be the new tidings of the black fleet. They are sparing only a tithe of their strength. Still every little is a gain.'
Pippin	'So ends a fair day in wrath!'
Bergil	'Come! There goes the trumpet for the closing of the Gate.'
Bergil	's house; it is good to be there in Spring, the woods and fields are full of flowers. But maybe we will go thither together yet. They will never overcome our Lord, and my father is very valiant. Farewell and return!'
Beregond	'It is a black night, and all the blacker since orders came that lights are to be dimmed within the City, and none are to shine out from the walls. And I can give you news of another order: you will be summoned to the Lord Denethor early tomorrow. I fear you will not be for the Third Company. Still we may hope to meet again. Farewell and sleep in peace!'
Gandalf	'When will Faramir return?'
Pippin	'I thought you had forgotten all about me. I am glad to see you back. It has been a long day.'
Gandalf	'I have come back here, for I must have a little peace, alone. You should sleep, in a bed while you still may. At the sunrise I shall take you to the Lord Denethor again. No, when the summons comes, not at sunrise. The Darkness has begun. There will be no dawn.'
Legolas	'And Gimli with him!'
Merry	't think the Riders will want to be bothered with me now. Though, of course, the king did say that I was to sit by him when he came to his house and tell him all about the Shire.'
Éomer	'No good!'
Éomer	'Halt! Halt! Who rides in Rohan?'
Éomer	'When you crossed the fords yonder you entered it. But it is the realm of Théoden the King. None ride here save by his leave. Who are you? And what is your haste?'
Halbarad	'We seek one Aragorn son of Arathorn, and we heard that he was in Rohan.'
Merry	'Of all joys this is the least expected!'
Merry	's, to waylay the king while he had only a few men about him; but it seemed that there would be no need to die in Théoden'
Halbarad	'That is all of our kindred that could be gathered in haste; but the brethren Elladan and Elrohir have ridden with us, desiring to go to the war. We rode as swiftly as we might when your summons came.'
Théoden	'If these kinsmen be in any way like to yourself, my lord Aragorn, thirty such knights will be a strength that cannot be counted by heads.'
Elrohir	'But let us speak no more of these things upon the open road!'
Halbarad	'What is that that you bear, kinsman?'
Halbarad	'She wrought it in secret, and long was the making. But she also sends word to you: The days now are short. Either our hope cometh, or all hopes end. Therefore I send thee what I have made for thee. Fare well, Elfstone!'
Merry	'All others are up and doing. Come, Master Sluggard, and look at this place while you may!'
Gimli	'and here Legolas and I played a game that I won only by a single orc. Come and see how it was! And there are caves, Merry, caves of wonder! Shall we visit them, Legolas, do you think?'
Merry	'Where is Aragorn?'
Legolas	'He has neither rested nor slept, I think. He went thither some hours ago, saying that he must take thought, and only his kinsman, Halbarad, went with him; but some dark doubt or care sits on him.'
Gimli	'Stout men and lordly they are, and the Riders of Rohan look almost as boys beside them; for they are grim men of face, worn like weathered rocks for the most part, even as Aragorn himself; and they are silent.'
Elladan	', and they are fair and gallant as Elven-lords; and that is not to be wondered at in the sons of Elrond of Rivendell.'
Gimli	'Word came to Rivendell, they say: Aragorn has need of his kindred. Let the Dúnedain ride to him in Rohan! But whence this message came they are now in doubt. Gandalf sent it, I would guess.'
Legolas	'Did she not speak through Gandalf of the ride of the Grey Company from the North?'
Gimli	'The Lady of the Wood! She read many hearts and desires. Now why did not we wish for some of our own kinsfolk, Legolas?'
Legolas	'They have no need to ride to war; war already marches on their own lands.'
Merry	'for this is little like my fair house in Edoras. And your friend is gone, who should also be here. But it may be long ere we sit, you and I, at the high table in Meduseld; there will be no time for feasting when I return thither. But come now! Eat and drink, and let us speak together while we may. And then you shall ride with me.'
Merry	'but I should like to do anything I could, you know.'
Éomer	'Maybe a light helm might be found to fit him; but we have no mail or sword for one of his stature.'
Merry	'Receive my service, if you will!'
Rohan	'Take your sword and bear it unto good fortune!'
Éomer	'Shall I bid men sound the horns? But where is Aragorn? His place is empty and he has not eaten.'
Théoden	'but let word be sent to the Lord Aragorn that the hour is nigh.'
Éomer	'Before the night of the third day from now we should come to the Hold. The Moon will then be one night past his full, and the muster that the king commanded will be held the day after. More speed we cannot make, if the strength of Rohan is to be gathered.'
Rohan	' He looked up, and it seemed that he had made some decision; his face was less troubled. Then, by our leave, lord, I must take new counsel for myself and my kindred. We must ride our own road, and no longer in secret. For me the time of stealth has passed. I will ride east by the swiftest way, and I will take the Paths of the Dead.'
Éomer	'their gate is in Dunharrow; but no living man may pass it.'
Éomer	'I had hoped that we should ride to war together; but if you seek the Paths of the Dead, then our parting is come, and it is little likely that we shall ever meet again under the Sun.'
Théoden	'It is your doom, maybe, to tread strange paths that others dare not. This parting grieves me, and my strength is lessened by it; but now I must take the mountain-roads and delay no longer. Farewell!'
Halbarad	'Little do they know of our long labour for the safekeeping of their borders, and yet I grudge it not.'
Legolas	'Speak and be comforted, and shake off the shadow! What has happened since we came back to this grim place in the grey morning?'
Hornburg	'I have looked in the Stone of Orthanc, my friends.'
Gimli	'Did you say aught to - him? Even Gandalf feared that encounter.'
Gimli	'Nay, my friends, I and the lawful master of the Stone, and I had both the right and the strength to use it, or so I judged. The right cannot be doubted. The strength was enough - barely.'
Gimli	'and now he will strike more swiftly.'
Gimli	'For what help is there to send thither, and how could it come there in time?'
Gimli	'It is a fell name; and little to the liking to the Men of Rohan, as I saw. Can the living use such a road and not perish? And even if you pass that way, what will so few avail to counter the strokes of Mordor?'
Rohirrim	'for it is closed to them. But in this dark hour the heir of Isildur may use it, if he dare. Listen! This is the word that the sons of Elrond bring to me from their father in Rivendell, wisest in lore: Bid Aragorn remember the words of the seer, and the Paths of the Dead.'
Legolas	'for I do not fear the Dead.'
Gimli	'for otherwise I see not why we should trouble them.'
Sauron	's part; and they hid themselves in secret places in the mountains and had no dealings with other men, but slowly dwindled in the barren hills. And the terror of the Sleepless Dead lies about the Hill of Erech and all places where that people lingered. But that way I must go, since there are none living to help me.'
Burg	'To the Stone of Erech! I seek the Paths of the Dead. Come with me who will!'
Éowyn	'Farewell, Lady of Rohan! I drink to the fortunes of your House, and of you, and of all your people. Say to your brother: beyond the shadows we may meet again!'
Legolas	'Aragorn, wilt thou go?'
Halbarad	'and my death lies beyond it. I will dare to pass it nonetheless; but no horse will enter.'
Gimli	's son would have been the first to run to the gleam of gold. But not here! Let it lie!'
Legolas	'I see shapes of Men and of horses, and pale banners like shreds of cloud, and spears like winter-thickets on a misty night. The Dead are following.'
Elladan	'We have descended from the uprising of the Morthond, the long chill river that flows at last to the sea that washes the walls of Dol Amroth. You will not need to ask hereafter how comes its name: Blackroot men call it.'
Sauron	's heir of Gondor.'
Frodo	'And yet they are more important than all the rest of us. And I came to help them; but now they must be hundreds of miles away, if they are still alive.'
Éomer	'Our journey is almost at an end.'
Théoden	'but I have far yet to go. Last night the moon was full, and in the morning I shall ride to Edoras to the gathering of the Mark.'
Éomer	'you would then return hither, until the war is over, lost or won.'
Wormtongue	'Long years in the space of days it seems since I rode west; but never will I lean on a staff again. If the war is lost, what good will be my hiding in the hills? And if it is won, what grief will it be, even if I fall, spending my last strength? But we will leave this now. Tonight I will lie in the Hold of Dunharrow. One evening of peace at least is left us. Let us ride on!'
Théoden	'We saw it also, but that was in the dead of night before Gandalf left us.'
Dúnhere	'Yet the same, or another like to it, a flying darkness in the shape of a monstrous bird, passed over Edoras that morning, and all men were shaken with fear. For it stooped upon Meduseld, and as it came low, almost to the gable, there came a cry that stopped our hearts. Then it was that Gandalf counselled us not to assemble in the fields, but to meet you here in the valley under the mountains. And he bade us to kindle no more lights or fires than barest need asked. So it has been done. Gandalf spoke with great authority. We trust that it is as you would wish. Naught has been seen in Harrowdale of these evil things.'
Théoden	'I will ride now to the Hold, and there before I go to rest I will meet the marshals and captains. Let them come to me as soon as may be!'
Merry	's party came up under the looming cliff on the eastern side of the valley; and there suddenly the path began to climb, and Merry looked up in amazement. He was on a road the like of which he had never seen before, a great work of men'
Mark	'My heart is glad at your returning.'
Éowyn	'is all well with you?'
Merry	'All is well. It was a weary road for the people to take, torn suddenly from their homes. There were hard words, for it is long since war has driven us from the green fields; but there have been no evil deeds. All is now ordered, as you see. And your lodging is prepared for you; for I have had full tidings of you and knew the hour of your coming.'
Éomer	'Is he still here?'
Théoden	'Of the Paths of the Dead?'
Éowyn	'And he has passed into the shadows from which none have returned. I could not dissuade him. He is gone.'
Éomer	'He is lost. We must ride without him, and our hope dwindles.'
Master Meriadoc	'You shall not stand. You shall sit beside me, as long as I remain in my own lands, and lighten my heart with tales.'
Éomer	'But as for the Paths of the Dead, you have yourself walked on their first steps. Nay. I speak no words of ill omen! The road that we have climbed is the approach to the Door, yonder in the Dimholt. But what lies beyond no man knows.'
Éowyn	'that in the moonless nights but little while ago a great host in strange array passed by. Whence they came none knew, but they went up the stony road and vanished into the hill, as if they went to keep a tryst.'
Merry	't you know anything that would explain it?'
Éomer	'none now in the land of the living can tell his purpose.'
Éowyn	'grimmer, older. Fey I thought him, and like one whom the Dead call.'
Éomer	'And that way I would not go though all the hosts of Mordor stood before me, and I were alone and had no other refuge. Alas that a fey mood should fall on a man so greathearted in this hour of need! Are there not evil things enough abroad without seeking them under the earth? War is at hand.'
Théoden	'Hirgon I am, errand-rider of Denethor, who bring you this token of war. Gondor is in great need. Often the Rohirrim have aided us, but now the Lord Denethor asks for all your strength and all your speed; lest Gondor fall at last.'
Théoden	'The Red Arrow has not been seen in the Mark in all my years! Has it indeed come to that? And what does the Lord Denethor reckon that all my strength and all my speed may be?'
Hirgon	'But ere long it may well come to pass that Minas Tirith is surrounded, and unless you have the strength to break a siege of many powers, the Lord Denethor bids me say that he judges that the strong arms of the Rohirrim would be better within his walls than without.'
Denethor	'But indeed our case is desperate. My lord does not issue any command to you, he begs you only to remember old friendship and oaths long spoken, and for your own good to do all that you may. It is reported to us that many kings have ridden in from the East to the service of Mordor. From the North to the field of Dagorlad there is skirmish and rumour of war. In the South the Haradrim are moving, and fear has fallen on all our coastlands, so that little help will come to us thence. Make haste! For it is before the walls of Minas Tirith that the doom of our time will be decided, and if the tide be not stemmed there, then it will flow over all the fair fields of Rohan, and even in this Hold among the hills there shall be no refuge.'
Hirgon	'If it must be so, it must. But you are like to find only ruined walls in seven days from now, unless other help unlooked-for comes. Still, you may at the least disturb the Orcs and Swarthy Men from their feasting in the White Tower.'
Merry	'even if you bid me ride with you on the Paths of the Dead.'
Merry	't.'
Éomer	'Let the Riders be marshalled!'
Merry	'In a little while I shall take the road. I release you from my service, but not from my friendship. You shall abide here, and if you will, you shall serve the Lady Éowyn, who will govern the folk in my stead.'
Merry	' I should be ashamed to stay behind.'
Théoden	'and great though your heart be, you cannot ride on such beasts.'
Merry	'It is a long way to run; but run I shall, if I cannot ride, even if I wear my feet off and arrive weeks too late.'
Théoden	'But at the least you shall ride with me to Edoras and look on Meduseld; for that way I shall go. So far Stybba can bear you: the great race will not begin till we reach the plains.'
Éowyn	'that you should be armed for battle. I have granted it, as I could. For my heart tells me that you will need such gear ere the end.'
Éowyn	'nor any time for the forging of such a hauberk; but here is also a stout jerkin of leather, a belt, and a knife. A sword you have.'
Merry	'and bear them to good fortune! Farewell now, Master Meriadoc! Yet maybe we shall meet again, you and I.'
Mark	's household-men, Riders of renown. Then the king followed with Éomer on his right. He had said farewell to Éowyn above in the Hold, and the memory was grievous; but now he turned his mind to the road that lay ahead. Behind him Merry rode on Stybba with the errand riders of Gondor, and behind them again twelve more of the king'
Théoden	'And in such a battle as we think to make on the fields of Gondor what would you do, Master Meriadoc, sword-thain though you be, and greater of heart than of stature?'
Merry	'But why, lord, did you receive me as sword-thain, if not to stay by your side? And I would not have it said of me in song only that I was always left behind!'
Théoden	'and also to do as I might bid. None of my Riders can bear you as burden. If the battle were before my gates, maybe your deeds would be remembered by the minstrels; but it is a hundred leagues and two to Mundburg where Denethor is lord. I will say no more.'
Merry	'You wish to go whither the Lord of the Mark goes: I see it in your face.'
Merry	'Thank you, sir, though I do not know your name.'
Éomer	'Too late now to turn aside. The fens of Entwash must guard our flank. Haste now we need. Ride on!'
Gandalf	'Time to get up and make yourself presentable. You are summoned to the Lord of the City to learn your new duties.'
Pippin	'Why did you bring me here?'
Gandalf	'To keep you out of mischief; and if you do not like being here, you can remember that you brought it on yourself.'
Denethor	'But that I shall learn soonest, maybe, if I keep you beside me. The esquire of my chamber has begged leave to go to the out-garrison, so you shall take his place for a while. You shall wait on me, bear errands, and talk to me, if war and council leave me any leisure. Can you sing?'
Pippin	'Well, yes, well enough for my own people. But we have no songs fit for great halls and evil times, lord. We seldom sing of anything more terrible than wind or rain. And most of my songs are about things that make us laugh; or about food and drink, of course.'
Pippin	's heart sank. He did not relish the idea of singing any song of the Shire to the Lord of Minas Tirith, certainly not the comic ones that he knew best; they were too, well, rustic for such an occasion. He was however spared the ordeal for the present. He was not commanded to sing. Denethor turned to Gandalf, asking questions about the Rohirrim and their policies, and the position of Éomer, the king'
Pippin	'and get you there the livery and gear of the Tower. It will be ready. It was commanded yesterday. Return when you are clad!'
Prince	'm not used, Master Beregond, to waiting hungry on others while they eat. It is a sore trial for a hobbit, that. No doubt you will think I should feel the honour more deeply. But what is the good of such honour? Indeed what is the good even of food and drink under this creeping shadow? What does it mean? The very air seems thick and brown! Do you often have such glooms when the wind is in the East?'
Beregond	'this is no weather of the world. This is some device of his malice; some broil of fume from the Mountain of Fire that he sends to darken hearts and counsel. And so it doth indeed. I wish the Lord Faramir would return. He would not be dismayed. But now, who knows if he will ever come back across the River out of the Darkness?'
Faramir	's council before the noon-meal, and in no good mood either, I thought. Perhaps he has some foreboding of bad news.'
Beregond	'Take courage and look! There are fell things below.'
Pippin	'They are looking for something, surely? See how they wheel and swoop, always down to that point over there! And can you see something moving on the ground? Dark little things. Yes, men on horses: four or five. Ah! I cannot stand it! Gandalf! Gandalf save us!'
Faramir	'Brave heart! But how can he win to the Gate, if these foul hell-hawks have other weapons than fear? But look! They hold on. They will make the Gate. No! the horses are running mad. Look! the men are thrown; they are running on foot. No, one is still up, but he rides back to the others. That will be the Captain: he can master both beasts and men. Ah! there one of the foul things is stooping on him. Help! help! Will no one go out to him? Faramir!'
Gandalf	'Gandalf! He always turns up when things are darkest. Go on! Go on, White Rider! Gandalf, Gandalf!'
Faramir	'Faramir!'
Gandalf	'He came with me. But let us not tarry here. There is much to say and to do, and you are weary. He shall come with us. Indeed he must, for if he does not forget his new duties more easily than I do, he must attend on his lord again within this hour. Come, Pippin, follow us!'
Faramir	'For this is not the first halfling that I have seen walking out of northern legends into the Southlands.'
Cirith Ungol	'The time, Faramir, the time? When did you part with them? When would they reach that accursed valley?'
Faramir	'It is fifteen leagues thence to the vale of the Morgulduin, if they went straight south; and then they would be still five leagues westward of the accursed Tower. At swiftest they could not come there before today, and maybe they have not come there yet. Indeed I see what you fear. But the darkness is not due to their venture. It began yestereve, and all Ithilien was under shadow last night. It is clear to me that the Enemy has long planned an assault on us, and its hour had already been determined before ever the travellers left my keeping.'
Gandalf	'The morning of two days ago, nigh on three days of journey! How far is the place where you parted?'
Faramir	'But I could not come more swiftly. Yestereve I lay at Cair Andros, the long isle in the River northward which we hold in defence; and horses are kept on the hither bank. As the dark drew on I knew that haste was needed, so I rode thence with three others that could also be horsed. The rest of my company I sent south to strengthen the garrison at the fords of Osgiliath. I hope that I have not done ill?'
Faramir	'I wish I had known your counsel before the burden of so weighty a judgement was thrust on me.'
Denethor	'You would still have done just so, I deem. I know you well. Ever your desire is to appear lordly and generous as a king of old, gracious, gentle. That may well befit one of high race, if he sits in power and peace. But in desperate hours gentleness may be repaid with death.'
Denethor	'But not with your death only, Lord Faramir: with the death also of your father, and of all your people, whom it is your part to protect now that Boromir is gone.'
Faramir	'that our places had been exchanged?'
Boromir	's need, and would not have squandered what fortune gave. He would have brought me a mighty gift.'
Faramir	'I would ask you, my father, to remember why it was that I, not he, was in Ithilien. On one occasion at least your counsel has prevailed, not long ago. It was the Lord of the City that gave the errand to him.'
Denethor	'Have I not tasted it now many nights upon my tongue foreboding that worse yet lay in the dregs? As now indeed I find. Would it were not so! Would that this thing had come to me!'
Gandalf	'In no case would Boromir have brought it to you. He is dead, and died well; may he sleep in peace! Yet you deceive yourself. He would have stretched out his hand to this thing, and taking it he would have fallen. He would have kept it for his own, and when he returned you would not have known your son.'
Boromir	'But I who was his father say that he would have brought it to me. You are wise, maybe, Mithrandir, yet with all your subtleties you have not all wisdom. Counsels may be found that are neither the webs of wizards nor the haste of fools. I have in this matter more lore and wisdom than you deem. '
Gandalf	'Yet there are other men and other lives, and time still to be. And for me, I pity even his slaves.'
Gondor	'If I had this thing now in the deep vaults of this citadel, we should not then shake with dread under this gloom, fearing the worst, and our counsels would be undisturbed. If you do not trust me to endure the test, you do not know me yet.'
Gandalf	'Had I done so, I could have sent this thing hither to your keeping and spared myself and others much anguish. And now hearing you speak I trust you less, no more than Boromir. Nay, stay your wrath! I do not trust myself in this, and I refused this thing, even as a freely given gift. You are strong and can still in some matters govern yourself, Denethor; yet if you had received this thing, it would have overthrown you. Were it buried beneath the roots of Mindolluin, still it would burn your mind away, as the darkness grows, and the yet worse things follow that soon shall come upon us.'
Faramir	'What think you of the garrison at Osgiliath?'
Faramir	'I have sent the company of Ithilien to strengthen it, as I have said.'
Denethor	'It is there that the first blow will fall. They will have need of some stout captain there.'
Faramir	' And then he swayed and leaned upon his father'
Denethor	'You have ridden fast and far, and under shadows of evil in the air, I am told.'
Tom	's need will be sterner.'
Cirith Ungol	'Just now, Pippin, my heart almost failed me, hearing that name. And yet in truth I believe that the news that Faramir brings has some hope in it. For it seems clear that our Enemy has opened his war at last and made the first move while Frodo was still free. So now for many days he will have his eye turned this way and that, away from his own land. And yet, Pippin, I feel from afar his haste and fear. He has begun sooner than he would. Something has happened to stir him.'
Gandalf	'Maybe even your foolishness helped, my lad. Let me see: some five days ago now he would discover that we had thrown down Saruman and had taken the Stone. Still what of that? We could not use it to much purpose, or without his knowing. Ah! I wonder. Aragorn? His time draws near. And he is strong and stern underneath, Pippin; bold, determined, able to take his own counsel and dare great risks at need. That may be it. He may have used the Stone and shown himself to the Enemy, challenging him, for this very purpose. I wonder. Well, we shall not know the answer till the Riders of Rohan come, if they do not come too late. There are evil days ahead. To sleep while we may!'
Gandalf	'Only one but will I allow tonight.'
Pippin	'How on earth could they be going about with him, even following him? And I could see that Faramir did not like the place he was taking them to any more than you do. What is wrong?'
Gandalf	'Yet my heart guessed that Frodo and Gollum would meet before the end. For good, or for evil. But of Cirith Ungol I will not speak tonight. Treachery, treachery I fear; treachery of that miserable creature. But so it must be. Let us remember that a traitor may betray himself and do good that he does not intend. It can be so, sometimes. Good night! '
Faramir	'Where are the Riders of Rohan?'
Denethor	'we should not lightly abandon the outer defences, the Rammas made with so great a labour. And the Enemy must pay dearly for the crossing of the River. That he cannot do, in force to assail the City, either north of Cair Andros because of the marshes, or southwards towards Lebennin because of the breadth of the River, that needs many boats. It is at Osgiliath that he will put his weight, as before when Boromir denied him the passage.'
Faramir	'Today we may make the Enemy pay ten times our loss at the passage and yet rue the exchange. For he can afford to lose a host better than we to lose a company. And the retreat of those that we put out far afield will be perilous, if he wins across in force.'
Prince	'That, too, must be held, if Osgiliath is defended. Let us not forget the danger on our left. The Rohirrim may come, and they may not. But Faramir has told us of great strength drawing ever to the Black Gate. More than one host may issue from it, and strike for more than one passage.'
Denethor	's will.'
Faramir	'I do not oppose your will, sire. Since you are robbed of Boromir, I will go and do what I can in his stead - if you command it.'
Faramir	'But if I should return, think better of me!'
Faramir	'You will be needed here, for other things than war. Your father loves you, Faramir, and will remember it ere the end. Farewell!'
Faramir	'Will he come? Will he remember our old alliance?'
Gandalf	'even if he comes too late. But think! At best the Red Arrow cannot have reached him more than two days ago, and the miles are long from Edoras.'
Osgiliath	'that the Black Captain leads them once again, and the fear of him has passed before him over the River.'
Faramir	'Say not that he has fallen!'
Gandalf	'But he still lived when I left him. Yet he is resolved to stay with the rearguard, lest the retreat over the Pelennor become a rout. He may, perhaps, hold his men together long enough, but I doubt it. He is pitted against a foe too great. For one has come that I feared.'
Denethor	'Nay, not yet, Master Peregrin! He will not come save only to triumph over me when all is won. He uses others as his weapons. So do all great lords, if they are wise, Master Halfling. Or why should I sit here in my tower and think, and watch, and wait, spending even my sons? For I can still wield a brand.'
Gandalf	'King of Angmar long ago, Sorcerer, Ringwraith, Lord of the Nazgûl, a spear of terror in the hand of Sauron, shadow of despair.'
Mithrandir	'For myself, I have long known who is the chief captain of the hosts of the Dark Tower. Is this all that you have returned to say? Or can it be that you have withdrawn because you are overmatched?'
Pippin	' Gandalf answered softly. '
Gandalf	'Fugitives from Cair Andros have already reached us. The isle has fallen. Another army is come from the Black Gate, crossing from the north-east.'
Mithrandir	'but to me this is no longer news: it was known to mw ere nightfall yesterday. As for the sortie, I had already given thought to it. Let us go down.'
Faramir	'He can govern man and beast. He will make it yet.'
Gondor	'Amroth to Faramir!'
Rohirrim	'Rohan will not come now. Or if they come, it will not avail us. The new host that we had tidings of has come first, from over the River by way of Andros, it is said. They are strong: battalions of Orcs of the Eye, and countless companies of Men of a new sort that we have not met before. Not tall, but broad and grim, bearded like dwarves, wielding great axes. Out of some savage land in the wide East they come, we deem. They hold the northward road; and many have passed on into Anórien. The Rohirrim cannot come.'
Faramir	'dying'
Denethor	'The fool'
Dol Amroth	'Belike the old tales speak well; there is Elvish blood in the veins of that folk, for the people of Nimrodel dwelt in that land once long ago.'
Denethor	'Better to burn sooner than late, for burn we must. Go back to your bonfire! And I? I will go now to my pyre. To my pyre! No tomb for Denethor and Faramir. No tomb! No long slow sleep of death embalmed. We will burn like heathen kings before ever a ship sailed hither from the West. The West has failed. Go back and burn!'
Faramir	'The house of his spirit crumbles.'
Pippin	'for I want to see Gandalf very much indeed. But he is no fool; and I will not think of dying until he despairs of life. But from my word and your service I do not wish to be released while you live. And if they come at last to the Citadel, I hope to be here and stand beside you and earn perhaps the arms that you have given me.'
Denethor	'But my life is broken. Send for my servants!'
Faramir	'I must find Gandalf. Poor Faramir! Quite likely he needs medicine more than tears. Oh, where can I find Gandalf? In the thick of things, I suppose; and he will have no time to spare for dying men or madmen.'
Beregond	'but tell me quickly, if you may: what goes forward? Whither has my Lord gone? I have just come on duty, but I heard that he passed towards the Closed Door, and men were bearing Faramir before him.'
Pippin	'to the Silent Street.'
Beregond	'and now he is dead.'
Pippin	'I must find Gandalf at once.'
Faramir	'And as for orders, I think you have a madman to deal with, not a lord. I must run. I will return if I can.'
Gandalf	'Go back to the abyss prepared for you! Go back! Fall into the nothingness that awaits you and your Master. Go!'
Merry	's command, to stay behind. He wondered, too, if the old King knew that he had been disobeyed and was angry. Perhaps not. There seemed to be some understanding between Dernhelm and Elfhelm, the Marshal who commanded the éored in which they were riding. He and all his men ignored Merry and pretended not to hear if he spoke. He might have been just another bag that Dernhelm was carrying. Dernhelm was no comfort: he never spoke to anyone. Merry felt small, unwanted, and lonely. Now the time was anxious, and the host was in peril. They were less than a day'
Elfhelm	'But my lord sends word that we must set ourselves in readiness: orders may come for a sudden move.'
Merry	'Are those their drums? I began to think I was imagining them, as no one else seemed to take any notice of them.'
Drúadan	's commands. Pack yourself up, Master Bag!'
Éomer	'How will you and your folk help us?'
Stone	'sit on horse-road. Very many, more than Horse-men.'
Théoden	'And our scouts say that they have cast trenches and stakes across the road. We cannot sweep them away in sudden onset.'
Éomer	'Mundburg is on fire!'
Dîn	's road. Wild Men will show you that road. Then you will kill gorgûn and drive away bad dark with bright iron, and Wild Men can go back to sleep in the wild woods.'
Éomer	'For though we leave a host of foes behind, what matter? If the Stone-city falls, then we shall have no returning. If it is saved, then the orc-host itself will be cut off. If you are faithful, Ghân-buri-Ghân, then we will give you rich reward, and you shall have the friendship of the Mark for ever.'
Éomer	'We must go at foot-pace, if you guide us; and I doubt not the way is narrow.'
Stone	'but narrow at beginning and at end. Wild Man could walk from here to Dîn between sunrise and noon.'
Éomer	'but we must reckon rather on some ten hours for all. Things unforeseen may hinder us, and if our host is all strung out, it will be long ere it can be set in order when we issue from the hills. What is the hour now?'
Théoden	'All is night now.'
Ghân	'When Sun comes we feel her, even when she is hidden. Already she climbs over East-mountains. It is the opening of day in the sky-fields.'
Éomer	's aid today.'
Dîn	's new walls. Many busy there. Walls stand up no longer: gorgûn knock them down with earth-thunder and with clubs of black iron. They are unwary and do not look about them. They think their friends watch all roads!'
Éomer	's devices oft serve us in his despite. The accursed darkness itself has been a cloak to us. And now, lusting to destroy Gondor and throw it down stone from stone, his orcs have taken away my greatest fear. The out-wall could have been held long against us. Now we can sweep through - if once we win so far.'
Théoden	'Good fortune go with you for tidings and for guidance!'
Ghân	'Drive away bad air and darkness with bright iron!'
Elfhelm	'for there are riders in the host who have ridden down to Mundburg in days of peace. I for one. When we come to the road it will veer south, and there will lie before us still seven leagues ere we reach the wall of the townlands. Along most of that way there is much grass on either side of the road. On that stretch the errand-riders of Gondor reckoned to make their greatest speed. We may ride it swiftly and without great rumour.'
Éomer	'I counsel that we rest now, and set out hence by night, and so time our going that we come upon the fields when tomorrow is as light as it will be, or when our lord gives the signal.'
Elfhelm	'save two men only: two dead men and two dead horses.'
Éomer	'What of it?'
Théoden	'Then Denethor has heard no news of our riding and will despair of our coming.'
Éomer	'And mayhap in this time shall the old saw be proved truer than ever before since men spoke with mouth.'
Elfhelm	's éored came next; and now Merry noticed that Dernhelm had left his place and in the darkness was moving steadily forward, until at last he was riding just in rear of the king'
Éomer	's banner in the centre. Elfhelm, lead your company to the right when we pass the wall. And Grimbold shall lead his towards the left. Let the other companies behind follow these three that lead, as they have chance. Strike wherever the enemy gathers. Other plans we cannot make, for we know not yet how things stand upon the field. Forth now, and fear no darkness!'
Dernhelm	'encumber a rider, and hope at best to stay in my seat and not be pounded to death by galloping hoofs!'
Rammas	's company was away on the right. Grimbold'
Théoden	'Up Eorlingas! Fear no darkness!'
Dernhelm	's daughter. You stand between me and my lord and kin. Begone, if you be not deathless! For living or dark undead, I will smite you, if you touch him.'
Merry	's fear. He opened his eyes and the blackness was lifted from them. There some paces from him sat the great beast, and all seemed dark about it, and above it loomed the Nazgûl Lord like a shadow of despair. A little to the left facing them stood she whom he had called Dernhelm. But the helm of her secrecy, had fallen from her, and her bright hair, released from its bonds, gleamed with pale gold upon her shoulders. Her eyes grey as the sea were hard and fell, and yet tears were on her cheek. A sword was in her hand, and she raised her shield against the horror of her enemy'
Master Holbytla	'My body is broken. I go to my fathers. And even in their mighty company I shall not now be ashamed. I felled the black serpent. A grim morn, and a glad day, and a golden sunset!'
Merry	'if I broke your command, and yet have done no more in your service than to weep at our parting.'
Merry	'Where is Éomer? For my eyes darken, and I would see him ere I go. He must be king after me. And I would send word to Éowyn. She, she would not have me leave her, and now I shall not see her again, dearer than daughter.'
Merry	'she is-'
Éowyn	' But thereupon Éomer rode up in haste, and with him came the knights of the household that still lived and had now mastered their horses. They looked in wonder at the carcase of the fell beast that lay there: and their steeds would not go near. But Éomer leaped from the saddle, and grief and dismay fell upon him as he came to the king'
Éowyn	'Théoden King! Théoden King!'
Éowyn	'Éowyn, how come you here? What madness or devilry is this? Death, death, death! Death take us all!'
Éowyn	's household they could not yet bring from the field; for seven of the king'
Théoden	'He is dead. But Éomer King now rides in the battle: he with the white crest in the wind.'
Éowyn	'Have even the women of the Rohirrim come to war in our need?'
Rohan	'Are there no leeches among you? She is hurt to the death maybe, but I deem that she yet lives.'
Éomer	'You come none too soon, my friend. Much loss and sorrow has befallen us.'
Gandalf	'Is it not a law in the City that those who wear the black and silver must stay in the Citadel, unless their lord gives them leave?'
Faramir	't you do something?'
Gandalf	'The Black Rider is abroad, and he will yet bring ruin on us. I have no time.'
Faramir	'He is not dead, and they will burn him alive, if someone does not stop them.'
Gandalf	'What is this tale? Be quick!'
Faramir	't you save Faramir?'
Gandalf	'but if I do, then others will die, I fear. Well, I must come, since no other help can reach him. But evil and sorrow will come of this. Even in the heart of our stronghold the Enemy has power to strike us: for his will it is that is at work.'
Pippin	'Rohan has come!'
Prince Imrahil	'Whither now, Mithrandir? The Rohirrim are fighting on the fields of Gondor! We must gather all the strength that we can find.'
Gandalf	's absence!'
Gandalf	'but it still lies heavy on this City.'
Gandalf	'you and I should have ridden to the fields long ago, but other matters delay me. Yet come swiftly if I call!'
Gandalf	'Stay this madness!'
Pippin	'Haste, haste! Do as I have bidden! Slay me this renegade! Or must I do so myself?'
Gondor	'Or may I not command my own servants?'
Gandalf	'But others may contest your will, when it is turned to madness and evil. Where is your son, Faramir?'
Denethor	'burning, already burning. They have set a fire in his flesh. But soon all shall be burned. The West has failed. It shall all go up in a great fire, and all shall be ended. Ash! Ash and smoke blown away on the wind!'
Denethor	'Do not take my son from me! He calls for me.'
Gandalf	'but you cannot come to him yet. For he must seek healing on the threshold of death, and maybe find it not. Whereas your part is to go out to the battle of your City, where maybe death awaits you. This you know in your heart.'
Denethor	'Battle is vain. Why should we wish to live longer? Why should we not go to death side by side?'
Steward	'And only the heathen kings, under the domination of the Dark Power, did thus, slaying themselves in pride and despair, murdering their kin to ease their own death.'
Gandalf	'We are needed. There is much that you can yet do.'
Gandalf	'if your will could have its way?'
Denethor	's pupil. But if doom denies this to me, then I will have naught: neither life diminished, nor love halved, nor honour abated.'
Steward	'And at the least you shall not rob your son of his choice while his death is still in doubt.'
Denethor	's love. Now thou stealest the hearts of my knights also, so that they rob me wholly of my son at the last. But in this at least thou shalt not defy my will: to rule my own end.'
Gandalf	's servants that stood there aghast. '
Steward	'This should now be given to the Lord Faramir,'
Dol Amroth	'but since he is not here, I must take this on myself. I bid you keep the key and guard it, until the City is set in order again.'
Pippin	'The Lord went away from the room where Faramir lay; and it was only when he returned that I first thought he was changed, old and broken.'
Faramir	'But we have seen that light before, and it has long been rumoured in the City, that the Lord would at times wrestle in thought with his Enemy.'
Merry	't bother you with any talk. But tell me, are you hurt, or wounded?'
Merry	't use my right arm, Pippin, not since I stabbed him. And my sword burned all away like a piece of wood.'
Pippin	't have let you walk at all; but you must forgive them. So many dreadful things have happened in the City, Merry, that one poor hobbit coming in from the battle is easily overlooked.'
Merry	's all going dark again, and my arm is so cold.'
Merry	's not far.'
Pippin	'No, we are going to the Houses of Healing.'
Pippin	' Just then to his surprise a boy came running up behind, and as he passed he recognized Bergil Beregond'
Bergil	'Where are you going? Glad to see you again, and still alive!'
Bergil	'I cannot stay.'
Pippin	't think he can walk so far. If Mithrandir is there, he will be glad of the message.'
Merry	's head in his lap. He felt his body and limbs gently, and took his friend'
Merry	'And yet here is another charge on my hands, while all the time the battle hangs in the balance.'
Faramir	'Alas! if he should die. Would that there were kings in Gondor, as there were once upon a time, they say! For it is said in old lore: The hands of the king are the hands of a healer. And so the rightful king could ever be known.'
Gandalf	'Men may long remember your words, Ioreth! For there is hope in them. Maybe a king has indeed returned to Gondor; or have you not heard the strange tidings that have come to the City?'
Éomer	's House. Will you suffer these to be challenged?'
Imrahil	'Where is the Steward? And where also is Mithrandir?'
Éomer	'Where is the Lady Éowyn, my sister; for surely she should be lying beside the king, and in no less honour? Where have they bestowed her?'
Imrahil	'But the Lady Éowyn was yet living when they bore her hither. Did you not know?'
Éomer	'We seek the Steward, and men say that he is in this House. Has any hurt befallen him? And the Lady Éowyn, where is she?'
Gandalf	'She lies within and is not dead, but is near death. But the Lord Faramir was wounded by an evil dart, as you have heard, and he is now the Steward; for Denethor has departed, and his house is in ashes.'
Imrahil	'So victory is shorn of gladness, and it is bitter bought, if both Gondor and Rohan are in one day bereft of their lords. Éomer rules the Rohirrim. Who shall rule the City meanwhile? Shall we not send now for the Lord Aragorn?'
Gandalf	'But for the present I am but the Captain of the Dúnedain of Arnor; and the Lord of Dol Amroth shall rule the City until Faramir awakes. But it is my counsel that Gandalf should rule us all in the days that follow and in our dealings with the Enemy.'
Gandalf	'Let us not stay at the door, for the time is urgent. Let us enter! For it is only in the coming of Aragorn that any hope remains for the sick that lie in the House. Thus spake Ioreth, wise-woman of Gondor: The hands of the king are the hands of a healer, and so shall the rightful king be known.'
Strider	't listen to me. How did you do it?'
Éomer	'Is it thus that we speak to our kings? Yet maybe he will wear his crown in some other name!'
Elfstone	'But Strider shall be the name of my house, if that be ever established. In the high tongue it will not sound so ill, and Telcontar I will be and all the heirs of my body.'
Éowyn	'long have I stood by them and at first they spoke much in their dreaming, before they sank into the deadly darkness. Also it is given to me to see many things far off.'
Faramir	'Would that Elrond were here, for he is the eldest of all our race, and has the greater power.'
Éomer	'First you must rest, surely, and at the least eat a little?'
Ioreth	'You have store in this House of the herbs of healing?'
Ioreth	'tis called so; for if I were a king, I would have plants more bright in my garden”. Still it smells sweet when bruised, does it not? If sweet is the right word: wholesome, maybe, is nearer.'
Gandalf	'I will ride to Lossarnach with Ioreth behind me, and she shall take me to the woods, but not to her sisters. And Shadowfax shall show her the meaning of haste.'
Faramir	's hand in his, and laid the other hand upon the sick man'
Gandalf	'But this comes not from the wound. See! that is healing. Had he been smitten by some dart of the Nazgûl, as you thought, he would have died that night. This hurt was given by some Southron arrow, I would guess. Who drew it forth? Was it kept?'
Imrahil	'and staunched the wound. But I did not keep the arrow, for we had much to do. It was, as I remember, just such a dart as the Southrons use. Yet I believed that it came from the Shadows above, for else his fever and sickness were not to be understood; since the wound was not deep or vital. How then do you read the matter?'
Black Breath	'He is a man of staunch will, for already he had come close under the Shadow before ever he rode to battle on the out-walls. Slowly the dark must have crept on him, even as he fought and strove to hold his outpost. Would that I could have been here sooner!'
Bergil	'but not fresh, I fear. It must have been culled two weeks ago at the least. I hope it will serve, Sir?'
Ioreth	'The weed is better than I thought. It reminds me of the roses of Imloth Melui when I was a lass, and no king could ask for better.'
Faramir	'My lord, you called me. I come. What does the king command?'
Faramir	'For who would lie idle when the king has returned?'
Wormtongue	's bewitchment; and she tended the king in growing fear. But that did not bring her to this pass!'
Eorl	's love for you, and her will still bent to her duty, had not restrained her lips; you might have heard even such things as these escape them. But who knows what she spoke to the darkness, alone, in the bitter watches of the night, when all her life seemed shrinking, and the walls of her bower closing in about her, a hutch to trammel some wild thing in?'
Éomer	'I saw also what you saw, Éomer. Few other griefs amid the ill chances of this world have more bitterness and shame for a man'
Éowyn	's daughter, awake! For your enemy has passed away!'
Éomer	'Call her!'
Éomer	'Éomer! What joy is this? For they said that you were slain. Nay, but that was only the dark voices in my dream. How long have I been dreaming?'
Éomer	'But think no more on it!'
Éomer	'but he bade me say farewell to Éowyn dearer than daughter. He lies now in great honour in the Citadel of Gondor.'
Eorl	's esquire, the Halfling? Éomer, you shall make him a knight of the Riddermark, for he is valiant!'
Gandalf	'Éomer shall stay here for a while. But do not speak yet of war or woe, until you are made whole again. Great gladness it is to see you wake again to health and hope, so valiant a lady!'
Éowyn	'It may be so. At least while there is an empty saddle of some fallen Rider that I can fill, and there are deeds to do. But to hope? I do not know.'
Merry	'Poor old Merry!'
Pippin	'though I daresay I could bring you something, if they will let me.'
Gandalf	'And anything else that this Rider of Rohan may desire, if it can be found in Minas Tirith, where his name is in honour.'
Merry	'll smoke again.'
Merry	't ever be able to smoke again without thinking of him, and that day, Pippin, when he rode up to Isengard and was so polite.'
Merry	't know.'
Master Meriadoc	'if you think that I have passed through the mountains and the realm of Gondor with fire and sword to bring herbs to a careless soldier who throws away his gear, you are mistaken. If your pack has not been found, then you must send for the herb-master of this House. And he will tell you that he did not know that the herb you desire had any virtues, but that it is called westmansweed by the vulgar, and galenas by the noble, and other names in other tongues more learned, and after adding a few half-forgotten rhymes that he does not understand, he will regretfully inform you that there is none in the House, and he will leave you to reflect on the history of tongues. And so now must I. For I have not slept in such a bed as this, since I rode from Dunharrow, nor eaten since the dark before dawn.'
Merry	'Go at once! Ever since that night at Bree we have been a nuisance to you. But it is the way of my people to use light words at such times and say less than they mean. We fear to say too much. It robs us of the right words when a jest is out of place.'
Longbottom Leaf	't live long on the heights.'
Merry	't broken.'
Éowyn	'will wish soon to rise and depart; but she should not be permitted to do so, if you can in any way restrain her, until at least ten days be passed.'
Faramir	'he must soon learn that his father is dead. But the full tale of the madness of Denethor should not be told to him, until he is quite healed and has duties to do. See that Beregond and the perian who were present do not speak to him of these things yet!'
Elrond	'The King is come again indeed.'
Gimli	'for they cost us great pains in our march over Rohan, and I would not have such pains all wasted.'
Legolas	'The houses are dead, and there is too little here that grows and is glad. If Aragorn comes into his own, the people of the Wood shall bring him birds that sing and trees that do not die.'
Prince Imrahil	's haven west over water.'
Prince	'yet never has one of the fair folk been seen there for years beyond count. And I marvel to see one here now in the midst of sorrow and war. What do you seek?'
Legolas	'For Aragorn sends this message to you. He does not wish to enter the City again at this time. Yet there is need for the captains to hold council at once, and he prays that you and Éomer of Rohan will come down to his tents, as soon as may be. Mithrandir is already there.'
Legolas	'If Gondor has such men still in these days of fading, great must have been its glory in the days of its rising.'
Gimli	'It is ever so with the things that Men begin: there is a frost in Spring, or a blight in Summer, and they fail of their promise.'
Legolas	'And that will lie in the dust and rot to spring up again in times and places unlooked-for. The deeds of Men will outlast us, Gimli.'
Gimli	'There are countless things still to see in Middle-earth, and great works to do. But if all the fair folk take to the Havens, it will be a duller world for those who are doomed to stay.'
Merry	'You must not go to the Havens, Legolas. There will always be some folk, big or little, and even a few wise dwarves like Gimli, who need you. At least I hope so. Though I feel somehow that the worst of this war is still to come. How I wish it was all over, and well over!'
Strider	't told me anything about it.'
Sun	'but there are memories of that road that I do not wish to recall out of the darkness. Had I known what was before me, I think that not for any friendship would I have taken the Paths of the Dead.'
Pippin	't you tell us some more?'
Gimli	's son, who had deemed himself more tough than Men, and hardier under earth than any Elf. But neither did I prove; and I was held to the road only by the will of Aragorn.'
Legolas	'For all those who come to know him come to love him after his own fashion, even the cold maiden of the Rohirrim. It was at early morn of the day ere you came there, Merry, that we left Dunharrow, and such a fear was on all the folk that none would look on our going, save the Lady Éowyn, who lies now hurt in the House below. There was grief at that parting, and I was grieved to behold it.'
Gimli	'Nay! I will not speak of that journey.'
Merry	'I will tell you enough for your peace; for I felt not the horror, and I feared not the shadows of Men, powerless and frail as I deemed them.'
Pelargir	' he said. '
Legolas	'In that hour I looked on Aragorn and thought how great and terrible a Lord he might have become in the strength of his will, had he taken the Ring to himself. Not for naught does Mordor fear him. But nobler is his spirit than the understanding of Sauron; for is he not of the children of Lúthien? Never shall that line fail, though the years may lengthen beyond count.'
Legolas	'Great deed was the riding of the Paths of the Dead, and great it shall remain, though none be left in Gondor to sing of it in the days that are to come.'
Gimli	'For the faces of Aragorn and Gandalf are grave. Much I wonder what counsels they are taking in the tents there below. For my part, like Merry, I wish that with our victory the war was now over. Yet whatever is still to do, I hope to have a part in it, for the honour of the folk of the Lonely Mountain.'
Wood	'and for the love of the Lord of the White Tree.'
Hornburg	'I deemed that the time was ripe, and that the Stone had come to me for just such a purpose. It was then ten days since the Ring-bearer went east from Rauros, and the Eye of Sauron, I thought, should be drawn out from his own land. Too seldom has he been challenged since he returned to his Tower. Though if I had foreseen how swift would be his onset in answer, maybe I should not have dared to show myself. Bare time was given me to come to your aid.'
Éomer	'All is vain, you say, if he has the Ring. Why should he think it not vain to assail us, if we have it?'
Elrohir	'From the North we came with this purpose, and from Elrond our father we brought this very counsel. We will not turn back.'
Éomer	'I have little knowledge of these deep matters; but I need it not. This I know, and it is enough, that as my friend Aragorn succoured me and my people, so I will aid him when he calls. I will go.'
Imrahil	'the Lord Aragorn I hold to be my liege-lord, whether he claim it or no. His wish is to me a command. I will go also. Yet for a while I stand in the place of the Steward of Gondor, and it is mine to think first of its people. To prudence some heed must still be given. For we must prepare against all chances, good as well as evil. Now, it may be that we shall triumph, and while there is any hope of this, Gondor must be protected. I would not have us return with victory to a City in ruins and a land ravaged behind us. And yet we learn from the Rohirrim that there is an army still unfought upon our northern flank.'
Gandalf	' time at the latest? And they must be hardy men that go willingly, knowing their peril.'
Éomer	'and we have suffered much loss of our horses, and that is ill to bear. If we must ride soon, then I cannot hope to lead even two thousands, and yet leave as many for the defence of the City.'
Imrahil	'and where now is the skill to rebuild it and set it up anew?'
Gimli	's son to ask for wrights of the Mountain. But men are better than gates, and no gate will endure against our Enemy if men desert it.'
Gandalf	'And there are names among us that are worth more than a thousand mail-clad knights apiece. No, he will not smile.'
Andúril	'You shall not be sheathed again until the last battle is fought;'
Gondor	' The hideous orc-head that was set upon the carven figure was cast down and broken in pieces, and the old king'
Minas Morgul	'the road that leads thence to the pass above will prove an easier way of assault upon the Dark Lord than his northern gate.'
Imrahil	'Say not The Lords of Gondor. Say The King Elessar. For that is true, even though he has not yet sat upon the throne; and it will give the Enemy more thought, if the heralds use that name.'
Sauron	's domination, and they worshipped him, being enamoured of evil knowledge. And he entered the service of the Dark Tower when it first rose again, and because of his cunning he grew ever higher in the Lord'
Gandalf	'it is also the custom for ambassadors to use less insolence. But no one has threatened you. You have naught to fear from us, until your errand is done. But unless your master has come to new wisdom, then with all his servants you will be in great peril.'
Gandalf	'Indeed, I know them all and all their history, and despite your scorn, foul Mouth of Sauron, you cannot say as much. But why do you bring them here?'
Isengard	's, and there his lieutenant shall dwell: not Saruman, but one more worthy of trust.'
Gandalf	'This is much to demand for the delivery of one servant: that your Master should receive in exchange what he must else fight many a war to gain! Or has the field of Gondor destroyed his hope in war, so that he falls to haggling? And if indeed we rated this prisoner so high, what surety have we that Sauron the Base Master of Treachery, will keep his part? Where is this prisoner? Let him be brought forth and yielded to us, and then we will consider these demands.'
Sauron	'Surety you crave! Sauron gives none. If you sue for his clemency you must first do his bidding. These are his terms. Take them or leave them!'
Gandalf	'But as for your terms, we reject them utterly. Get you gone, for your embassy is over and death is near to you. We did not come here to waste words in treating with Sauron, faithless and accursed; still less with one of his slaves. Begone!'
Merry	'll find an easier end. But now I must do my best.'
Merry	'll smite some of this beastly brood before the end. I wish I could see cool sunlight and green grass again!'
Bilbo	'But no! That came in his tale, long long ago. This is my tale, and it is ended now. Good-bye!'
Shelob	's tunnel, not west. Out westward in the world it was drawing to noon upon the fourteenth day of March in the Shire-reckoning. And even now Aragorn was leading the black fleet from Pelargir, and Merry was riding with the Rohirrim down the Stonewain Valley, while in Minas Tirith flames were rising and Pippin watched the madness growing in the eyes of Denethor. Yet amid all their cares and fear the thoughts of their friends turned constantly to Frodo and Sam. They were not forgotten. But they were far beyond aid, and no thought could yet bring any help to Samwise Hamfast'
Frodo	'm coming, Mr. Frodo!'
Shagrat	's patrol had only been a part of his garrison. Almost certainly they were quarrelling about Frodo, and the spoil. For a second Sam halted, for suddenly things seemed clear to him, almost as if he had seen them with his eyes. The mithril coat! Of course, Frodo was wearing it, and they would find it. And from what Sam had heard Gorbag would covet it. But the orders of the Dark Tower were at present Frodo'
Sam	' He drew Sting and ran towards the open gate. But just as he was about to pass under its great arch he felt a shock: as if he had run into some web like Shelob'
Sam	`Tell Captain Shagrat that the great Elf-warrior has called, with his elf-sword too!'
Sam	'd better follow these lights.'
Shagrat	's nobody left alive in the place!'
Frodo	'm coming at last, right to the top, to see what I must.'
Snaga	'll send you to Shelob.'
Gorbag	's swine got to the gate first, and none of ours got out. Lagduf and Muzgash ran through, but they were shot. I saw it from a window, I tell you. And they were the last.'
Shagrat	't escape by skulking here.'
Snaga	've fought for the Tower against those stinking Morgul-rats, but a nice mess you two precious captains have made of things, fighting over the swag.'
Shagrat	`I had my orders. It was Gorbag started it, trying to pinch that pretty shirt.'
Gorbag	't.'
Shagrat	'll put red maggot-holes in your belly first.'
Gorbag	'll finish my job now.'
Frodo	's my job to go right up to the top first, whatever happens afterwards.'
Sam	't be the top of the tower. But what can I do now?'
Snaga	're up to.'
Frodo	've come!'
Sam	've come.'
Frodo	't dreaming after all when I heard that singing down below, and I tried to answer? Was it you?'
Frodo	'd given up hope, almost. I couldn'
Frodo	' he said, trying to sound as cheerful as he had when he drew back the curtains at Bag End on a summer'
Frodo	`Where are we? How did I get here?'
Frodo	't know. More than a day, I guess.'
Frodo	'll never forget their claws and eyes.'
Frodo	't want to see them again, the sooner we get going the better. Can you walk?'
Frodo	've a pain here.'
Gamgee	't go walking in the Black Land in naught but your skin, Mr. Frodo.'
Frodo	't escape. Only Elves can escape. Away, away out of Middle-earth, far away over the Sea. If even that is wide enough to keep the Shadow out.'
Frodo	`But I suppose you must take it back.'
Frodo	't have it!'
Frodo	's too hard a job, I could share it with you, maybe?'
Frodo	't, you thief!'
Frodo	't come between me and this doom.'
Frodo	'd best match. Now put this round you!'
Frodo	't have to go far.'
Frodo	`And be quick! There may be orcs still alive, lurking in wait.'
Frodo	'll call. What the Elves say. No orc would say that.'
Frodo	't be seen.'
Frodo	're ready! You can pick up a shield as we go.'
Frodo	't we going to match?'
Frodo	'll just have to cover up.'
Frodo	've made inquiries about inns along the road? Or have you forgotten about food and drink?'
Faramir	't they drink? Or do they just live on foul air and poison?'
Sam	's no time to look for them,'
Faramir	've slashed up my water-bottle.'
Frodo	't do us any good!'
Frodo	't come.'
Frodo	's come over me.'
Frodo	't be more dangerous than before. Now for it!'
Frodo	's a sheer drop over the wall. Follow me!'
Frodo	'If we were real orcs, we ought to be dashing back to the Tower, not running away. The first enemy we meet will know us. We must get off this road somehow.'
Sam	'not without wings.'
Frodo	'Good-bye!'
Frodo	'put that mail-shirt on!'
Frodo	'Not even a leather jerkin is any good.'
Frodo	'Down into the valley quick, and then turn northward, as soon as ever we can.'
Shagrat	'd shake his hand,'
Frodo	's time we made another effort.'
Sam	's a long time, Mr. Frodo, since I had a proper sleep, and my eyes just closed down on their own.'
Sam	't win through by fighting.'
Sam	't like to think of you with naught but a bit of leather between you and a stab in the dark.'
Frodo	'm ungrateful. I hate to think of the foul work you must have had among the bodies to find it for me.'
Frodo	'd carry you on my back, if I could. Let it go then!'
Frodo	've caught a chill.'
Frodo	'll keep you from harm better than any other gear. It was made by the Lady.'
Frodo	't see them now.'
Frodo	's a long way to Lórien.'
Frodo	'I can feel it. We had better keep still for a while.'
Frodo	's passed,'
Frodo	's not having it all his own way. His darkness is breaking up out in the world there. I wish I could see what is going on!'
Frodo	't you got some hope now?'
Frodo	'm so tired. And the Ring is so heavy, Sam. And I begin to see it in my mind all the time, like a great wheel of fire.'
Frodo	' food; it may hearten you.'
Sam	'Let me drink first Mr. Frodo,'
Sam	's poisonous, or something that will show its badness quick, well, better me than you, master, if you understand me.'
Sam	's very cold!'
Frodo	'I have just about enough strength left to find some hole away up there. And then I must rest a little.'
Sam	's hide!'
Frodo	'I must rest now, Sam, and sleep if I can.'
Sam	's bag of Faramir'
Frodo	's getting dark again. I reckon this day is nearly over.'
Frodo	's hand; and there he sat silent till deep night fell. Then at last, to keep himself awake, he crawled from the hiding-place and looked out. The land seemed full of creaking and cracking and sly noises, but there was no sound of voice or of foot. Far above the Ephel Dúath in the West the night-sky was still dim and pale. There, peeping among the cloud-wrack above a dark tor high up in the mountains, Sam saw a white star twinkle for a while. The beauty of it smote his heart, as he looked up out of the forsaken land, and hope returned to him. For like a shaft, clear and cold, the thought pierced him that in the end the Shadow was only a small and passing thing: there was light and high beauty for ever beyond its reach. His song in the Tower had been defiance rather than hope; for then he was thinking of himself. Now, for a moment, his own fate, and even his masters, ceased to trouble him. He crawled back into the brambles and laid himself by Frodo'
Sam	's such a lot of folk there must be wells or water, not to mention food. And these are Men not Orcs, or my eyes are all wrong.'
Sam	't cross all that open country crawling with enemies, even if we did get down.'
Frodo	've still got to do the best I can. At present that is to avoid being captured as long as possible. So we must still go northwards, I think, and see what it is like where the open plain is narrower.'
Sam	'll see, Mr. Frodo.'
Shagrat	't be captain any more.'
Nazgûl	's in charge at the Tower now.'
Sam	'If this nice friendliness would spread about in Mordor, half our trouble would be over.'
Frodo	't get much hope out of it. They hate us far more, altogether and all the time. If those two had seen us, they would have dropped all their quarrel until we were dead.'
Frodo	't I?'
Frodo	'Well come now! I think we had better not move out from here again, until it has gone quite dark. So you shall tell me how you know, and all about what happened. If you can do it quietly.'
Sam	'but when I think of that Stinker I get so hot l could shout.'
Frodo	's treacherous attack, the horror of Shelob, and his own adventures with the orcs. When he had finished, Frodo said nothing but took Sam'
Frodo	'but have you any notion how far there is still to go?'
Frodo	'In Rivendell before I set out I was shown a map of Mordor that was made before the Enemy came back here; but I only remember it vaguely. I remember clearest that there was a place in the north where the western range and the northern range send out spurs that nearly meet. That must be twenty leagues at least from the bridge back by the Tower. It might be a good point at which to cross. But of course, if we get there, we shall be further than we were from the Mountain, sixty miles from it, I should think. I guess that we have gone about twelve leagues north from the bridge now. Even if all goes well, I could hardly reach the Mountain in a week. I am afraid, Sam, that the burden will get very heavy, and I shall go still slower as we get nearer.'
Frodo	' waybread.'
Frodo	's start another march!'
Frodo	't climb up westward, or climb down eastward.'
Frodo	've got to make a dash for it!'
Frodo	'll just plod along after you.'
Frodo	'll get no further.'
Sam	't it enough to have orcs by the thousand without that stinking villain coming nosing round? I wish he had been shot!'
Frodo	't hold up my lids much longer.'
Frodo	's caught himself.'
Frodo	's a bottle full of water. Drink up. We can fill it again when we go on.'
Frodo	're trapped at last!'
Sam	'Well, we can but wait and see.'
Sam	'Hi, you! Get up!'
Frodo	'll have that big slave-driving devil anyway,'
Frodo	'One more crawl, and then you can lie still.'
Sam	'll take a week, if it takes a day, with Mr. Frodo as he is.'
Cotton	't. He would have done something.'
Frodo	's a chance. Can you manage it?'
Frodo	'I must.'
Frodo	't quite. A steady pace for a few more miles, and then a rest.'
Sauron	's will to work for another effort. At length, stooping and caressing Frodo'
Sam	'It is such a weight to carry, such a weight.'
Sam	'You know I would, and gladly, as long as I have any strength.'
Frodo	't help me in that way again. I am almost in its power now. I could not give it up, and if you tried to take it I should go mad.'
Frodo	're not sure to need.'
Frodo	't need much on that road. And at its end nothing.'
Faramir	's country, the day I saw an oliphaunt?'
Frodo	'At least, I know that such things happened, but I cannot see them. No taste of food, no feel of water, no sound of wind, no memory of tree or grass or flower, no image of moon or star are left to me. I am naked in the dark. Sam, and there is no veil between me and the wheel of fire. I begin to see it even with my waking eyes, and all else fades.'
Sam	't going to mess with my pans!'
Cotton	'and far away. The way back, if there is one, goes past the Mountain.'
Gamgee	't go on much longer giving him all the water and most of the food.'
Gamgee	't be able to do anything for himself.'
Frodo	't.'
Sam	'll carry Mr. Frodo up myself, if it breaks my back and heart. So stop arguing!'
Sam	'and I will!'
Frodo	'll go.'
Frodo	'How far is there to go?'
Sam	're going.'
Sam	'd have to say I was beaten in the end.'
Sauron	's shadow-mantled fortress. Often blocked or destroyed by the tumults of the Mountain'
Frodo	'Now, now, or it will be too late!'
Frodo	's all up, or it soon will be. Now, Sam Gamgee, this is the end of ends.'
Frodo	's legs dangle. Then he bowed his head and struggled off along the climbing road. It was not as easy a way to take as it had looked at first. By fortune the fires that had poured forth in the great turmoils when Sam stood upon Cirith Ungol had flowed down mainly on the southern and western slopes, and the road on this side was not blocked. Yet in many places it had crumbled away or was crossed by gaping rents. After climbing eastward for some time it bent back upon itself at a sharp angle and went westward fox a space. There at the bend it was cut deep through a crag of old weathered stone once long ago vomited from the Mountain'
Sam	'll deal with him. Go on!'
Frodo	'Farewell, Sam! This is the end at last. On Mount Doom doom shall fall. Farewell!'
Sam	'At last I can deal with you!'
Sam	's hand wavered. His mind was hot with wrath and the memory of evil. It would be just to slay this treacherous, murderous creature, just and many times deserved; and also it seemed the only safe thing to do. But deep in his heart there was something that restrained him: he could not strike this thing lying in the dust, forlorn, ruinous, utterly wretched. He himself, though only for a little while, had borne the Ring, and now dimly he guessed the agony of Gollum'
Sam	'Frodo! Master!'
Sam	's long hands draw upwards to his mouth; his white fangs gleamed, and then snapped as they bit. Frodo gave a cry, and there he was, fallen upon his knees at the chasm'
Frodo	's words: Even Gollum may have something yet to do? But for him, Sam, I could not have destroyed the Ring. The Quest would have been in vain, even at the bitter end. So let us forgive him! For the Quest is achieved, and now all is over. I am glad you are here with me. Here at the end of all things, Sam.'
Sauron	'The Ring-bearer has fulfilled his Quest.'
Gwaihir	'Thrice shall pay for all, if you are willing. You will not find me a burden much greater than when you bore me from Zirak-zigil, where my old life burned away.'
Gwaihir	'whither you will, even were you made of stone.'
Frodo	'Here at the end of all things, Sam.'
Frodo	's not like me, somehow, if you understand.'
Frodo	's like things are in the world. Hopes fail. An end comes. We have only a little time to wait now. We are lost in ruin and downfall, and there is no escape.'
Frodo	's go down the path at any rate!'
Sam	' said Frodo; and they rose and went slowly down the winding road; and even as they passed towards the Mountain'
Frodo	'll say: Now comes the story of Nine-fingered Frodo and the Ring of Doom? And then everyone will hush, like we did, when in Rivendell they told us the tale of Beren One-hand and the Great Jewel. I wish I could hear it! And I wonder how it will go on after our part.'
Ithilien	'I am glad to wake!'
Sam	't a dream! Then where are we?'
Gandalf	'Well, Master Samwise, how do you feel?'
Gandalf	's happened to the world?'
Frodo	's had a cruel time.'
Sam	'Noon of what day?'
Gandalf	'or if you like, the eighth day of April in the Shire reckoning.« But in Gondor the New Year will always now begin upon the twenty-fifth of March when Sauron fell, and when you were brought out of the fire to the King. He has tended you, and now he awaits you. You shall eat and drink with him. When you are ready I will lead you to him.'
Sam	'What king, and who is he?'
Gandalf	'and he has taken back all his ancient realm. He will ride soon to his crowning, but he waits for you.'
Gandalf	'Even the orc-rags that you bore in the black land; Frodo, shall be preserved. No silks and linens, nor any armour or heraldry could be more honourable. But later I will find some other clothes, perhaps.'
Frodo	'Can it be - ?'
Sam	's gifts: your glass, Frodo, and your box, Sam. You will be glad to have these safe again.'
Frodo	'm still asleep!'
Strider	'It is a long way, is it not, from Bree, where you did not like the look of me? A long way for us all but yours has been the darkest road.'
Sam	'O great glory and splendour! And all my wishes have come true!'
Sun	'Praise them with great praise!'
Frodo	'Sting I gave to you Sam,'
Merry	's more tales to tell than ours.'
Pippin	's not so close as he used to be, though he laughs now more than he talks. For the present Merry and I are busy. We are knights of the City and of the Mark, as I hope you observe.'
Merry	'm a dwarf.'
Gimli	'But what did I say? Mortals cannot go drinking ent-draughts and expect no more to come of them than of a pot of beer.'
Sam	'There you go about Ents again; but what they are beats me. Why, it will take weeks before we get all these things sized up!'
Pippin	'And then Frodo will have to be locked up in a tower in Minas Tirith and write it all down. Otherwise he will forget half of it, and poor old Bilbo will be dreadfully disappointed.'
Gandalf	'But you went to the very brink of death ere he recalled you, putting forth all his power, and sent you into the sweet forgetfulness of sleep. And though you have indeed slept long and blessedly, still it is now time to sleep again.'
Frodo	's foot, though it be all that can be seen under a heap of bodies. And when I heaved that great carcase off you, I made sure you were dead. I could have. torn out my beard. And it is only a day yet since you were first up and abroad again. To bed now you go. And so shall I.'
Éowyn	'And those who have not swords can still die upon them. Would you have the folk of Gondor gather you herbs only, when the Dark Lord gathers armies? And it is not always good to be healed in body. Nor is it always evil to die in battle, even in bitter pain. Were I permitted, in this dark hour I would choose the latter.'
Éowyn	'It is not lack of care that grieves me. No houses could be fairer, for those who desire to be healed. But I cannot lie in sloth, idle, caged. I looked for death in battle. But I have not died, and battle still goes on.'
Faramir	'I also am a prisoner of the healers.'
Faramir	'Nor have I yet taken up my authority in the City. But had I done so, I should still listen to his counsel, and should not cross his will in matters of his craft, unless in some great need.'
Faramir	'But death in battle may come to us all yet, willing or unwilling. You will be better prepared to face it in your own manner, if while there is still time you do as the Healer commanded. You and I, we must endure with patience the hours of waiting.'
Faramir	'That can be amended. In this I will command the Warden. If you will stay in this house in our care, lady, and take your rest, then you shall walk in this garden in the sun, as you will; and you shall look east, whither all our hopes have gone. And here you will find me, walking and waiting, and also looking east. It would ease my care, if you would speak to me, or walk at whiles with me.'
Faramir	'But think not ill of me, if I say to you: they have brought me both a joy and a pain that I never thought to know. Joy to see you; but pain, because now the fear and doubt of this evil time are grown dark indeed. Éowyn, I would not have this world end now, or lose so soon what I have found.'
Faramir	'of the land of Westernesse that foundered and of the great dark wave climbing over the green lands and above the hills, and coming on, darkness unescapable. I often dream of it.'
Éowyn	'Darkness Unescapable?'
Faramir	'It was but a picture in the mind. I do not know what is happening. The reason of my waking mind tells me that great evil has befallen and we stand at the end of days. But my heart says nay; and all my limbs are light, and a hope and joy are come to me that no reason can deny. Éowyn, Éowyn, White Lady of Rohan, in this hour I do not believe that any darkness will endure!'
Faramir	'Éowyn, why do you tarry here, and do not go to the rejoicing in Cormallen beyond Cair Andros, where your brother awaits you?'
Elendil	's heir, in his triumph would now bring you no joy. Or because I do not go, and you desire still to be near me. And maybe for both these reasons, and you yourself cannot choose between them. Éowyn, do you not love me, or will you not?'
Faramir	'Do not scorn pity that is the gift of a gentle heart, Éowyn! But I do not offer you my pity. For you are a lady high and valiant and have yourself won renown that shall not be forgotten; and you are a lady beautiful, I deem, beyond even the words of the Elven-tongue to tell. And I love you. Once I pitied your sorrow. But now, were you sorrowless, without fear or any lack, were you the blissful Queen of Gondor, still I would love you. Éowyn, do you not love me?'
Faramir	'No longer do I desire to be a queen,'
Faramir	'for I am not a king. Yet I will wed with the White Lady of Rohan, if it be her will. And if she will, then let us cross the River and in happier days let us dwell in fair Ithilien and there make a garden. All things will grow with joy there, if the White Lady comes.'
Gondor	'And would you have your proud folk say of you: “There goes a lord who tamed a wild shieldmaiden of the North! Was there no woman of the race of Númenor to choose?”'
Faramir	'Here is the Lady Éowyn of Rohan, and now she is healed.'
Éowyn	'Yet now that I have leave to depart, I would remain. For this House has become to me of all dwellings the most blessed.'
Imloth Melui	'Those are Periain, out of the far country of the Halflings, where they are princes of great fame, it is said. I should know, for I had one to tend in the Houses. They are small, but they are valiant. Why, cousin, one of them went with only his esquire into the Black Country and fought with the Dark Lord all by himself, and set fire to his Tower, if you can believe it. At least that is the tale in the City. That will be the one that walks with our Elfstone. They are dear friends, I hear. Now he is a marvel, the Lord Elfstone: not too soft in his speech, mind you, but he has a golden heart, as the saying is; and he has the healing hands. “The hands of the king are the hands of a healer”, I said; and that was how it was all discovered. And Mithrandir, he said to me: “Ioreth, men will long remember your words”, and-'
Faramir	' as long as my line shall last. Do now thy office!'
Faramir	's son of Númenor. Shall he be king and enter into the City and dwell there?'
Ioreth	'This is just a ceremony such as we have in the City, cousin; for he has already entered, as I was telling you; and he said to me-'
Elendil	'Out of the Great Sea to Middle-earth I am come. In this place will I abide, and my heirs, unto the ending of the world.'
Faramir	'By the labour and valour of many I have come into my inheritance. In token of this I would have the Ring-bearer bring the crown to me, and let Mithrandir set it upon my head, if he will; for he has been the mover of all that has been accomplished, and this is his victory.'
Éomer	'Between us there can be no word of giving or taking, nor of reward; for we are brethren. In happy hour did Eorl ride from the North, and never has any league of peoples been more blessed, so that neither has ever failed the other, nor shall fail. Now, as you know, we have laid Théoden the Renowned in a tomb in the Hallows, and there he shall lie for ever among the Kings of Gondor, if you will. Or if you desire it, we will come to Rohan and bring him back to rest with his own people.'
Éomer	'Since the day when you rose before me out of the green grass of the downs I have loved you, and that love shall not fail. But now I must depart for a while to my own realm, where there is much to heal and set in order. But as for the Fallen, when all is made ready we will return for him; but here let him sleep a while.'
Faramir	'Now I must go back to my own land and look on it once again, and help my brother in his labour; but when one whom I long loved as father is laid at last to rest, I will return.'
Legolas	'but I would have you wait a little while longer: for the end of the deeds that you have shared in has not yet come. A day draws near that I have looked for in all the years of my manhood, and when it comes I would have my friends beside me.'
Frodo	't wish to go; but the days are running away, and Bilbo is waiting; and the Shire is my home.'
Bilbo	'he is waiting for the same day, and he knows what keeps you. And as for the passing of the days, it is now only May and high summer is not yet in; and though all things may seem changed, as if an age of the world had gone by, yet to the trees and the grass it is less than a year since you set out.'
Frodo	't you say that Gandalf was less close than of old? He was weary of his labours then, I think. Now he is recovering.'
Gandalf	'Many folk like to know beforehand what is to be set on the table; but those who have laboured to prepare the feast like to keep their secret; for wonder makes the words of praise louder. And Aragorn himself waits for a sign.'
Gandalf	'This is your realm, and the heart of the greater realm that shall be. The Third Age of the world is ended, and the new age is begun; and it is your task to order its beginning and to preserve what may be preserved. For though much has been saved, much must now pass away; and the power of the Three Rings also is ended. And all the lands that you see, and those that lie round about them, shall be dwellings of Men. For the time comes of the Dominion of Men, and the Elder Kindred shall fade or depart.'
Gandalf	'The Third Age was my age. I was the Enemy of Sauron; and my work is finished. I shall go soon. The burden must lie now upon you and your kindred.'
Gandalf	'Verily this is a sapling of the line of Nimloth the fair; and that was a seedling of Galathilion, and that a fruit of Telperion of many names, Eldest of Trees. Who shall say how it comes here in the appointed hour? But this is an ancient hallow, and ere the kings failed or the Tree withered in the court, a fruit must have been set here. For it is said that, though the fruit of the Tree comes seldom to ripeness, yet the life within may then lie sleeping through many long years, and none can foretell the time in which it will awake. Remember this. For if ever a fruit ripens, it should be planted, lest the line die out of the world. Here it has lain. hidden on the mountain, even as the race of Elendil lay hidden in the wastes of the North. Yet the line of Nimloth is older far than your line, King Elessar.'
North	'At last they have come. Let all the City be made ready!'
Frodo	'At last I understand why we have waited! This is the ending. Now not day only shall be beloved, but night too shall be beautiful and blessed and all its fear pass away!'
Frodo	'But first I must go to Rivendell. For if there could be anything wanting in a time so blessed, I missed Bilbo; and I was grieved when among all the household of Elrond I saw that he was not come.'
Arwen	'For you know the power of that thing which is now destroyed; and all that was done by that power is now passing away. But your kinsman possessed this thing longer than you. He is ancient in years now, according to his kind; and he awaits you, for he will not again make any long journey save one.'
Arwen	'A gift I will give you. For I am the daughter of Elrond. I shall not go with him now when he departs to the Havens; for mine is the choice of Lúthien, and as she so have I chosen, both the sweet and the bitter. But in my stead you shall go, Ring-bearer, when the time comes, and if you then desire it. If your hurts grieve you still and the memory of your burden is heavy, then you may pass into the West, until all your wounds and weariness are healed. But wear this now in memory of Elfstone and Evenstar with whom your life has been woven!'
Frodo	'this will bring you aid.'
Éomer	's son, have you your axe ready?'
Gimli	'but I can speedily fetch it, if there be need.'
Éomer	'For there are certain rash words concerning the Lady in the Golden Wood that lie still between us. And now I have seen her with my eyes.'
Gimli	'and what say you now?'
Éomer	'I will not say that she is the fairest lady that lives.'
Éomer	'Had I seen her in other company, I would have said all that you could wish. But now I will put Queen Arwen Evenstar first, and I am ready to do battle on my own part with any who deny me. Shall I call for my sword?'
Gimli	'You have chosen the Evening; but my love is given to the Morning. And my heart forebodes that soon it will past away for ever.'
Eorl	'Hail, Éomer, King of the Mark!'
Éomer	'Now this is the funeral feast of Théoden the King; but I will speak ere we go of tidings of joy, for he would not grudge that I should do so, since he was ever a father of Éowyn my sister. Hear then all my guests, fair folk of many realms, such as have never before been gathered in this hall! Faramir, Steward of Gondor, and Prince of Ithilien, asks that Éowyn Lady of Rohan should be his wife, and she grants it full willing. Therefore they shall be trothplighted before you all.'
Faramir	'is the friendship of the Mark and of Gondor bound with a new bond, and the more do I rejoice.'
Éomer	'to give thus to Gondor the fairest thing in your realm!'
Éowyn	'Wish me joy, my liege-lord and healer!'
Éomer	'Farewell now, Meriadoc of the Shire and Holdwine of the Mark! Ride to good fortune, and ride back soon to our welcome!'
Éomer	'Kings of old would have laden you with gifts that a wain could not bear for your deeds upon the fields of Mundburg; and yet you will take naught, you say, but the arms that were given to you. This I suffer, for indeed I have no gift that is worthy; but my sister begs you to receive this small thing, as a memorial of Dernhelm and of the horns of the Mark at the coming of the morning.'
Éowyn	'It was made by the Dwarves, and came from the hoard of Scatha the Worm. Eorl the Young brought it from the North. He that blows it at need shall set fear in the hearts of his enemies and joy in the hearts of his friends, and they shall hear him and come to him.'
Legolas	'Now therefore let us go to Fangorn and set the score right!'
Gandalf	'and to thank you for your aid in all that has been achieved.'
Gandalf	'and in this age it may well prove that the kingdoms of Men shall outlast you, Fangorn my friend. But now come tell me: what of the task that I set you? How is Saruman? Is he not weary of Orthanc yet? For I do not suppose that he will think you have improved the view from his windows.'
Merry	'I thought you would come to that. Weary of Orthanc? Very weary at last; but not so weary of his tower as he was weary of my voice. Hoom! I gave him some long tales, or at least what might be thought long in your speech.'
Gandalf	'that with great care you say dwelt, was, grew. What about is? Is he dead?'
Gandalf	'but this snake had still one tooth left, I think. He had the poison of his voice, and I guess that he persuaded you, even you Treebeard, knowing the soft spot in your heart. Well, he is gone, and there is no more to be said. But the Tower of Orthanc now goes back to the King, to whom it belongs. Though maybe he will not need it.'
Quickbeam	'and I bid you farewell. May your forest grow again in peace. When this valley is filled there is room and to spare west of the mountains, where once you walked long ago.'
Legolas	's leave I will visit the deep places of the Entwood and see such trees as are nowhere else to be found in Middle-earth. You shall come with me and keep your word; and thus we will journey on together to our own lands in Mirkwood and beyond.'
Gimli	'Well, farewell. my hobbits! You should come safe to your own homes now, and I shall not be kept awake for fear of your peril. We will send word when we may, and some of us may yet meet at times; but I fear that we shall not all be gathered together ever again.'
Celeborn	'It is sad that we should meet only thus at the ending. For the world is changing: I feel it in the water, I feel it in the earth, and I smell it in the air. I do not think we shall meet again.'
Celeborn	'Not in Middle-earth, nor until the lands that lie under the wave are lifted up again. Then in the willow-meads of Tasarinan we may meet in the Spring. Farewell!'
Merry	'will you drink another draught with me before you go?'
Pippin	'and that we could speak to them from far away!'
Celeborn	'Elfstone, through darkness you have come to your hope, and have now all your desire. Use well the days!'
Celeborn	'Kinsman, farewell! May your doom be other than mine, and your treasure remain with you to the end!'
Gandalf	'Where are you going?'
Gandalf	'no and no. But in any case the time of my labours now draws to an end. The King has taken on the burden. If you had waited at Orthanc, you would have seen him, and he would have shown you wisdom and mercy.'
Saruman	'for I desire neither of him. Indeed if you wish for an answer to your first question, I am seeking a way out of his realm.'
Gandalf	'and I see no hope in your journey. But will you scorn our help? For we offer it to you.'
Saruman	'Nay, pray do not smile at me! I prefer your frowns. And as for the Lady here, I do not trust her: she always hated me, and schemed for your part. I do not doubt that she has brought you this way to have the pleasure of gloating over my poverty. Had I been warned of your pursuit, I would have denied you the pleasure.'
Saruman	'we have other errands and other cares that seem to us more urgent than hunting for you. Say rather that you are overtaken by good fortune; for now you have a last chance.'
Saruman	'for I shall be spared the trouble of refusing it again. All my hopes are ruined, but I would not share yours. If you have any.'
Merry	'You are welcome to it; it came from the flotsam of Isengard.'
Saruman	'll be bound. Still, a beggar must be grateful, if a thief returns him even a morsel of his own. Well, it will serve you right when you come home, if you find things less good in the Southfarthing than you would like. Long may your land be short of leaf!'
Merry	'In that case I will have my pouch back, which is not yours and has journeyed far with me. Wrap the weed in a rag of your own.'
Pippin	'Thief indeed! What of our claim for waylaying, wounding, and orc-dragging us through Rohan?'
Sam	's time we got back.'
Frodo	't go any quicker, if we are to see Bilbo. I am going to Rivendell first, whatever happens.'
Gandalf	'But alas for Saruman! I fear nothing more can be made of him. He has withered altogether. All the same, I am not sure that Treebeard is right: I fancy he could do some mischief still in a small mean way.'
Sam	'I wish I was going back to Lórien!'
Elrond	's house. And they went down and crossed the bridge and came to the doors, and all the house was filled with light and song for joy at Elrond'
Bilbo	'How splendid! How wonderful! But where were we?'
Frodo	'm worried about my gaffer, to tell you the truth.'
Frodo	'Except the Sea.'
Frodo	'I think I shall come too. At least as far as Bree. I want to see Butterbur.'
Bilbo	'I am sorry. I shall miss you. It is nice just to know that you are about the place. But I am getting very sleepy.'
Sam	'May come in useful, if you think of getting married, Sam.'
Merry	't finish growing up soon, you are going to find hats and clothes expensive.'
Pippin	't try and beat the Bullroarer.'
Bilbo	's become of my ring, Frodo, that you took away?'
Frodo	'I got rid of it, you know.'
Bilbo	't it: to get rid of it? But it is all so confusing, for such a lot of other things seem to have got mixed up with it: Aragorn'
Gandalf	's very cosy here, and the food'
Frodo	't ever write our story now.'
Frodo	't be too critical.'
Frodo	't be dangerous any more. There is a real king now and he will soon put the roads in order.'
Bilbo	'That really is a very great relief to my mind.'
Frodo	' said Gandalf quietly as he rode by Frodo'
Frodo	'It is my shoulder. The wound aches, and the memory of darkness is heavy on me. It was a year ago today.'
Frodo	'There is no real going back. Though I may come to the Shire, it will not seem the same; for I shall not be the same. I am wounded with knife, sting, and tooth, and a long burden. Where shall I find rest?'
Gandalf	'How is Harry?'
Pippin	's been on my mind many a time and the wolves howling and all.'
Butterbur	've come back!'
Strider	't doubt. A fine beast, as I said when I first set eyes on him. Well, come in! Make yourselves at home!'
Butterbur	't many folk there this evening, anyway. But if you could spare me half an hour before you go to your beds, I would dearly like to have some talk with you, quiet-like by ourselves.'
Gandalf	'll bless you.'
Butterbur	'll do what I can.'
Baggins	'd have thought it in our times!'
Green	'll believe me.'
Gandalf	'How many?'
Butterbur	's my belief they let them in. On the night of the fight, I mean. And that was after we showed them the gates and pushed them out: before the year'
Pippin	'd left all trouble behind us.'
Butterbur	't go for armed folk, with swords and helmets and shields and all. Make them think twice, that would. And I must say it put me aback a bit when I saw you.'
Gandalf	'if they are afraid of just five of us, then we have met worse enemies on our travels. But at any rate they will give you peace at night while we stay.'
Butterbur	's been very disturbing, if you understand me.'
Butterbur	' strangers camping here and settling there and tearing up the wild country.'
Grey	' ride of Bree. And many folk used to dwell away north, a hundred miles or more from here, at the far end of the Greenway: on the North Downs or by Lake Evendim.'
Butterbur	's haunted land, they say. None but a robber would go there.'
Norbury	'll have some fair folk riding through.'
Butterbur	'And it will be good for business, no doubt. So long as he lets Bree alone.'
Gandalf	'He knows it and loves it.'
Butterbur	's been a comfort in trouble, I will say.'
Sam	'But he says your beer is always good.'
Strider	't you got that into your head yet?'
Strider	'Him with a crown and all and a golden cup! Well, what are we coming to?'
Butterbur	'Nob, you slowcoach!'
Brandybuck	's looked after it.'
Bill	's another wish come true! Where is he?'
Bree	'away south'
Butterbur	'll be pleased.'
Sam	'What I saw in the Mirror: trees cut down and all, and my old gaffer turned out of the Row. I ought to have hurried back quicker.'
Merry	's a general shortage of pipe-weed.'
Pippin	'Lotho will be at the bottom of it: you can be sure of that.'
Gandalf	'You have forgotten Saruman. He began to take an interest in the Shire before Mordor did.'
Merry	'so things will soon be cleared up.'
Frodo	'I wonder how he is getting on?'
Gandalf	'Quite untroubled and I should guess, not much interested in anything that we have done or seen, unless perhaps in our visits to the Ents. There may be a time later for you to go and see him. But if I were you, I should press on now for home, or you will not come to the Brandywine Bridge before the gates are locked.'
Merry	'll let me through that at any time.'
Gandalf	'll! manage all right. Good-bye dear friends! Not for the last time, not yet. Good-bye!'
Merry	'We have left all the rest behind, one after another. It seems almost like a dream that has slowly faded.'
Frodo	'To me it feels more like falling asleep again.'
Shire	'll tear down your notice when I find it.'
Merry	't know me, Hob Hayward, you ought to. I am Merry Brandybuck, and I should like to know what all this is about, and what a Bucklander like you is doing here. You used to be on the Hay Gate.'
Merry	'm pleased to see you alive after all!'
Frodo	'Well, I am glad he has dropped the Baggins at any rate. But it is evidently high time that the family dealt with him and put him in his place.'
Merry	'Two is enough.'
Merry	't obey. And when you have opened the gates you will go through them and never return. You are a ruffian and a highway-robber.'
Bill	'Give me the key!'
Merry	'll have to put us up.'
Merry	't allowed.'
Merry	'Has it been a bad year, or what? I thought it had been a fine summer and harvest.'
Pippin	'll be better than many places I have seen.'
Sarn Ford	' last year, after you left. But it had been going away quietly before that, in a small way. That Lotho-'
Hob Hayward	'll all be in trouble.'
Sam	's sleep and forget it till morning!'
Baggins	're arrested for Gate-breaking, and Tearing up of Rules, and Assaulting Gate-keepers, and Trespassing, and Sleeping in Shire-buildings without Leave, and Bribing Guards with Food.'
Sam	'Calling your Chief Names, Wishing to punch his Pimply Face, and Thinking you Shirriffs look a lot of Tom-fools.'
Frodo	'I am going where I please, and in my own time. I happen to be going to Bag End on business, but if you insist on going too, well that is your affair.'
Baggins	've arrested you.'
Frodo	'll be obliged.'
Baggins	'll take you there. '
Frodo	'll follow.'
Robin Smallburrow	'I want a word with you.'
Frodo	's all this about the inn being closed?'
Robin	't hold with folk moving about; so if they will or they must, then they has to go to the Shirriff-house and explain their business.'
Sam	'You used to like the inside of an inn better than the outside yourself. You were always popping in, on duty or off.'
Sam	's different.'
Sam	'm going to get angry.'
Will Whitfoot	'em now.'
Sam	'Who sent you to Frogmorton?'
Shirriffs	's a few as do spy-work for the Chief and his Men.'
Shirriffs	'prisoners'
Merry	't want me to deal with them!'
Merry	'We are going on.'
Green	't dawdle on the way!'
Pippin	'Good luck to you!'
Frodo	's own country, and they found out now that they cared about it more than any other place in the world. Many of the houses that they had known were missing. Some seemed to have been burned down. The pleasant row of old hobbit-holes in the bank on the north side of the Pool were deserted, and their little gardens that used to run down bright to the water'
Frodo	's up. I want to find my gaffer.'
Merry	'I guess that the “Chief” will have a gang of ruffians handy. We had better find someone who will tell us how things are round here.'
Bill	's at Bree,'
Merry	'A little footsore, perhaps. We promised to wait for them here.'
Merry	'We are not used to footpads in this country, but we know how to deal with them.'
Sharkey	'll do what Sharkey says.'
Sharkey	'll learn a thing or two, you little rat-folk.'
Frodo	'I am on my way to call on Mr. Lotho, and he may be interested to hear of them too.'
Sharkey	're not wanted, we can put them out of mischief. See?'
Isengard	's messengers will ride up the Greenway now not bullies from Isengard.'
Frodo	'll take notice, perhaps.'
Pippin	'little cock-a-whoop'
Merry	'If you trouble this village again, you will regret it.'
Frodo	'Miserable fool, but I am sorry for him.'
Pippin	'Destroy him I should say.'
Frodo	's a prisoner in Bag End now, I expect, and very frightened. We ought to try and rescue him.'
Pippin	'Of all the ends to our journey that is the very last I should have thought of: to have to fight half-orcs and ruffians in the Shire itself - to rescue Lotho Pimple!'
Frodo	' orders because they are frightened. No hobbit has ever killed another on purpose in the Shire, and it is not to begin now. And nobody is to be killed at all, if it can be helped. Keep your tempers and hold your hands to the last possible moment!'
Merry	't rescue Lotho, or the Shire, just by being shocked and sad, my dear Frodo.'
Pippin	're only four, even if we are armed.'
Cotton	's down South Lane! He always was a stout fellow. And he has a lot of lads that were all friends of mine.'
Merry	's no good “getting under cover”. That is just what people have been doing, and just what these ruffians like. They will simply come down on us in force, corner us, and then drive us out, or burn us in. No, we have got to do something at once.'
Merry	'll try to stamp on us and put us out quick. We'
Cotton	's the chief person round here, and the sturdiest. Come on! I am going to blow the horn of Rohan, and give them all some music they have never heard before.'
Sam	's all this to-do?'
Gamgee	've come back.'
Cotton	've been in foreign parts, seemingly. We feared you were dead.'
Frodo	're starting now.'
Cotton	't stick at nothing. But come on now, lads! Bywater is up! We must be in it!'
Cotton	't safe yet for them to be left all alone.'
Gamgee	've a mail-shirt on me.'
Cotton	'Hullo Rosie!'
Rosie	't hurried have you?'
Frodo	'd have a look and see how Mrs. Cotton was keeping, and you, Rosie.'
Cotton	't for these thieving ruffians.'
Frodo	'you want to leave him for, as soon as things look dangerous?'
Sam	'Go on now! But take care of yourself, and come straight back as soon as you have settled the ruffians!'
Frodo	'until I know more. How many of these ruffians are there?'
Cotton	't let no one go near.'
Cotton	's not above three hundred of them in the Shire all told, and maybe less. We can master them, if we stick together.'
Cotton	've shot one or two of our folk.'
Merry	'I knew we should have to fight. Well, they started the killing.'
Cotton	'em. Tooks shot three for prowling and robbing. After that the ruffians turned nastier. And they keep a pretty close watch on Tookland. No one gets in nor out of it now.'
Pippin	'But someone is going to get in again, now. I am off to the Smials. Anyone coming with me to Tuckborough?'
Pippin	'll bring you back an army of Tooks in the morning.'
Frodo	'I wish for no killing; not even of the ruffians, unless it must be done, to prevent them from hurting hobbits.'
Merry	've got a plan.'
Frodo	'You make the arrangements.'
Cotton	't trouble about them just yet.'
Cotton	're not wanted.'
Merry	'and I warned you not to come back here. I warn you again: you are standing in the light and you are covered by archers. If you lay a finger on this farmer, or on anyone else, you will be shot at once. Lay down any weapons that you have!'
Cotton	' time, Mr. Merry.'
Merry	's dark now. I think the next stroke must wait until morning. Then we must call on the Chief.'
Sam	's come of him, Mr. Cotton?'
Bagshot Row	't allowed.'
Cotton	'But I want to see him. That Boss and that Sharkey, as they spoke of, they might do a mischief up there before the morning.'
Cotton	'll not have need to go near the old Hobbiton village over Water. My Jolly here will show you.'
Cotton	'd already bought Sandyman'
Michel Delving	's been plain ruination.'
Merry	'I heard one of the ruffians speak of him.'
Cotton	's the real Chief now, I guess. All the ruffians do what he says; and what he says is mostly hack, burn, and ruin; and now it s come to killing. There s no longer even any bad sense in it. They cut down trees and let '
Miller	's Sharkey, I say.'
Tom	'Why, they even took Pimple'
Sharkey	's no denying she showed more spirit than most.'
Baggins	've been and dug up Bagshot Row and ruined my taters!'
Frodo	'll do my best to make amends.'
Baggins	's behaved hisself and given satisfaction?'
Frodo	' Sam blushed, but he looked gratefully at Frodo, for Rosie'
Cotton	'but the gang from Waymeet will be along any time now.'
Thain	's sent Mr Peregrin back with all the other folk he can spare.'
Merry	're fire-raising as they come. Curse them!'
Cotton	's got to be some fighting before this is settled, Mr. Frodo.'
Merry	'Your fellows from Hobbiton did the same, and one is dead and the rest are prisoners. Lay down your weapons! Then go back twenty paces and sit down. Any who try to break out will be shot.'
Pippin	'All that country is alive with our hunters now.'
Cotton	'Well, I suppose it is time now that we dealt with the “Chief”.'
Merry	's responsible for bringing in these ruffians, and for all the evil they have done.'
Cotton	't know.'
Sam	've cut down the Party Tree!'
Sam	've work to do in the Shire now.'
Sandyman	'll foot a bill too big for your purse.'
Sandyman	'll touch you all right, if I have any more of your mouth.'
Frodo	'I hope there are not many more hobbits that have become like this. It would be a worse trouble than all the damage the Men have done.'
Sandyman	'And also very much out of your reckoning. We are just going up the Hill to remove your precious Boss. We have dealt with his Men.'
Merry	've a better.'
Merry	'Shall we turn on the others to search the sheds?'
Sam	'Much worse in a way. It comes home to you, as they say; because it is home, and you remember it before it was all ruined.'
Frodo	'Just one of its works. Saruman was doing its work all the time, even when he thought he was working for himself. And the same with those that Saruman tricked, like Lotho.'
Merry	's throat.'
Frodo	'Sharkey!'
Saruman	'So you have heard the name, have you? All my people used to call me that in Isengard, I believe. A sign of affection, possibly.« But evidently you did not expect to see me here.'
Saruman	's home could be all wrecked, and he could be turned out, but no one could touch yours. Oh no! Gandalf would look after your affairs.'
Saruman	're such fools, I will get ahead of them and teach them a lesson. One ill turn deserves another.” It would have been a sharper lesson, if only you had given me a little more time and more Men. Still I have already done much that you will find it hard to mend or undo in your lives. And it will be pleasant to think of that and set it against my injuries.'
Frodo	'I pity you. It will be a pleasure of memory only, I fear. Go at once and never return!'
Saruman	'But do not think that when I lost all my goods I lost all my power! Whoever strikes me shall be accursed. And if my blood stains the Shire, it shall wither and never again be healed.'
Frodo	'Do not believe him! He has lost all power, save his voice that can still daunt you and deceive you, if you let it. But I will not have him slain. It is useless to meet revenge with revenge: it will heal nothing. Go, Saruman, by the speediest way!'
Wormtongue	'These fine fellows and lordlings are turning us adrift again. Come along!'
Frodo	'Do not kill him even now. For he has not hurt me. And in any case I do not wish him to be slain in this evil mood. He was great once, of a noble kind that we should not dare to raise our hands against. He is fallen, and his cure is beyond us; but I would still spare him, in the hope that he may find it.'
Frodo	'Yes, you have grown very much. You are wise, and cruel. You have robbed my revenge of sweetness, and now I must go hence in bitterness, in debt to your mercy. I hate it and you! Well, I go and I will trouble you no more. But do not expect me to wish you health and long life. You will have neither. But that is not my doing. I merely foretell.'
Wormtongue	'You need not follow him. I know of no evil you have done to me. You can have rest and food here for a while, until you are stronger and can go your own ways.'
Wormtongue	't you, Worm? Will you tell them?'
Wormtongue	'No, no!'
Saruman	't you, Worm? Stabbed him in his sleep, I believe. Buried him, I hope; though Worm has been very hungry lately. No, Worm is not really nice. You had better leave him to me.'
Wormtongue	'You told me to; you made me do it,'
Sharkey	' He kicked Wormtongue in the face as he grovelled, and turned and made off. But at that something snapped: suddenly Wormtongue rose up, drawing a hidden knife, and then with a snarl like a dog he sprang on Saruman'
Sam	's a good riddance.'
Frodo	'The very last stroke. But to think that it should fall here, at the very door of Bag End! Among all my hopes and fears at least I never expected that.'
Sam	'll take a lot of time and work.'
Pippin	's your size in hats now?'
Lobelia	's murder, and she would'
Sharkey	's Men'
Frodo	'Open it!'
Frodo	'and then use the gift to help your work and better it. And use it sparingly. There is not much here, and I expect every grain has a value.'
North	'Ah! that was proper fourteen-twenty, that was!'
Frodo	'When are you going to move in and join me, Sam?'
Frodo	'But you know the Gaffer is close at hand, and he will be very well looked after by Widow Rumble.'
Cotton	't call it that.” Still I see what she means. I feel torn in two, as you might say.'
Frodo	's room enough in Bag End for as big a family as you could wish for.'
Merry	'Lordly'
Frodo	't know what to do.'
Frodo	's wrong with the old customs? Choose a flower name like Rose. Half the maidchildren in the Shire are called by such names, and what could be better?'
Frodo	't trouble about the length: it must be a beautiful flower, because, you see, I think she is very beautiful, and is going to be beautifuller still.'
Frodo	'Well, Sam, what about elanor, the sun-star, you remember the little golden flower in the grass of Lothlórien?'
Frodo	's what I wanted.'
Bilbo	'And he will pass the Old Took. He will be a hundred and thirty-one!'
Sam	's a marvel!'
Frodo	't go far or for a long time now, of course,'
Rose	'll come back quite safe.'
Frodo	'And yet the only place I really want to be in is here. I am that torn in two.'
Frodo	'But you will be healed. You were meant to be solid and whole, and you will be.'
Frodo	's thin wandering hand; but most of it was written in Frodo'
Frodo	'Well, you have kept at it, I must say.'
Frodo	'The last pages are for you.'
Frodo	'It seems like a dream now.'
Elrond	'I hear and see that you have used my gift well. The Shire shall now be more than ever blessed and beloved.'
Frodo	's settled. And now I think I am quite ready to go on another journey. Are you coming?'
Frodo	'The Ring-bearers should go together.'
Sam	'I thought you were going to enjoy the Shire, too. for years and years, after all you have done.'
Círdan	'All is now ready.'
Frodo	'This time you have nearly succeeded, but you have failed again. It was not Sam, though, that gave you away this time, but Gandalf himself!'
Gandalf	'than one alone. Well, here at last, dear friends, on the shores of the Sea comes the end of our fellowship in Middle-earth. Go in peace! I will not say: do not weep; for not all tears are an evil.'
