Ainur	'Behold your Music!'
Ulmo	'Truly, Water is become now fairer than my heart imagined, neither had my secret thought conceived the snowflake, nor in all my music was contained the falling of the rain. I will seek Manwë, that he and I may make melodies for ever to my delight!'
Arda	'This kingdom thou shalt not take for thine own, wrongfully, for many others have laboured here do less than thou.'
Ainur	'Behold I love the Earth, which shall be a mansion for the Quendi and the Atani! But the Quendi shall be the fairest of all earthly creatures, and they shall have and shall conceive and bring forth more beauty than all my Children; and they shall have the greater bliss in this world. But to the Atani I will give a new gift.'
Ainur	''
Eru	'Thy offer I accepted even as it was made. Dost thou not see that these things have now a life of their own, and speak with their own voices? Else they would not have flinched from thy blow, nor from any command of thy will.'
Arda	'Not unless Melkor darken their hearts,'
Aulë	'It is true,'
Manwë	'If thou hadst thy will what wouldst thou reserve?'
Yavanna	'All have their worth,'
Manwë	'This is a strange thought,'
Yavanna	'Yet it was in the Song,'
Kementári	'O Kementári, Eru hath spoken, saying: "
Aulë	'Nay,'
Aulë	'Nonetheless they will have need of wood,'
Tulkas	'This is the counsel of Ilúvatar in my heart: that we should take up again the mastery of Arda, at whatsoever cost, and deliver the Quendi from the shadow of Melkor.'
Lórien	'Surely there is healing in Aman? Here all weariness can find rest.'
Fingolfin	'So it is, even as I guessed,'
Noldor	's house he stayed him; and the point of his bright sword he set against Fingolfin'
Fëanor	'I will release my brother.'
Silmaril	's heart was still bitter at his humiliation before Mandos, and he looked at Melkor in silence, pondering if indeed he might yet trust him so far as to aid him in his flight. And Melkor, seeing that Fëanor wavered, and knowing that the Silmarils held his heart in thrall, said at the last: '
Mandos	's fear, and he cursed Melkor and bade him be gone, saying: '
Fëanor	'While the ban lasts upon Fëanor my son, that he may not go to Tirion, I hold myself unkinged, and I will not meet my people.'
Fëanor	'I hear thee,'
Fëanor	'Not the first,'
Arda	'Thou hast spoken.'
Morgoth	'What wouldst thou have more?'
Yea	'Not so much,'
Valar	'Why, O people of the Noldor,'
Tulkas	'Fair shall the end be,'
Fëanor	's end. Fingolfin and Turgon his son therefore spoke against Fëanor, and fierce words awoke, so that once again wrath came near to the edge of swords. But Finarfin spoke softly, as was his wont, and sought to calm the Noldor, persuading them to pause and ponder ere deeds were done that could not be undone; and Orodreth, alone of his sons, spoke in like manner. Finrod was with Turgon, his friend; but Galadriel, the only woman of the Noldor to stand that day tall and valiant among the contending princes, was eager to be gone. No oaths she swore, but the words of Fëanor concerning Middle-earth had kindled in her heart, for she yearned to see the wide unguarded lands and to rule there a realm at her own will. Of like mind with Galadriel was Fingon Fingolfin'
Fëanor	'Nay, let us be gone!'
Eru	'Against the folly of Fëanor shall be set my counsel only. Go not forth! For the hour is evil, and your road leads to sorrow that ye do not foresee. No aid will the Valar lend you in this quest; but neither will they hinder you; for this ye shall know: as ye came hither freely, freely shall ye depart. But thou Fëanor Finwë'
Noldor	'You renounce your friendship, even in the hour of our need,'
Fëanor	'We renounce no friendship. But it may be the part of a friend to rebuke a friend'
Eru	'Ye have spilled the blood of your kindred unrighteously and have stained the land of Aman. For blood ye shall render blood, and beyond Aman ye shall dwell in Death'
Fingon	's lies came between, spoke to Fëanor, saying: '
Teleri	'None and none! What I have left behind I count now no loss; needless baggage on the road it has proved. Let those that cursed my name, curse me still, and whine their way back to the cages of the Valar! Let the ships burn!'
Noldor	'Thus it may come to pass,'
Aman	's realm in Doriath. And at times Melian and Galadriel would speak together of Valinor and the bliss of old; but beyond the dark hour of the death of the Trees Galadriel would not go, but ever fell silent. And on a time Melian said: '
Galadriel	'For that woe is past,'
Fëanor	'I believe not that the Noldor came forth as messengers of the Valar, as was said at first: not though they came in the very hour of our need. For they speak never of the Valar, nor have their high lords brought any message to Thingol, whether from Manwë, or Ulmo, or even from Olwë the King'
Morgoth	"Near,'
Galadriel	'Maybe,'
Arda	'This is a great matter,'
Thingol	'I marvel at you, son of Eärwen,'
Fëanor	's heart the memory of the words of Caranthir welled up again in bitterness, and he cried: '
Al	'Yet the shadow of Mandos lies on you also,'
Aredhel	'And be wary,'
Fëanor	'Turn now south and not north, for I will not ride to Hithlum; my heart desires rather to find the sons of Fëanor, my friends of old.'
Teleri	'You are of the house of Eöl, Maeglin, my son,'
Gondolin	's heart to leave Nan Elmoth for ever. Therefore he said to Aredhel: '
Gondolin	'I have learned. Lord Curufin,'
Curufin	'You have my leave, but not my love,'
Eöl	'It is good, Lord Curufin, to find a kinsman thus kindly at need. I will remember it when I return.'
Maeglin	'I rejoice indeed that Ar-Feiniel has returned to Gondolin,'
Eöl	'Lord,'
Eöl	'Alas! Eöl has followed us, even as I feared. But with great stealth was it done; for we saw and heard no pursuit as we entered upon the Hidden Way.'
Teleri	'I acknowledge not your law,'
Bëor	'A darkness lies behind us,'
Haladin	'Others of my own kin have crossed the Mountains,'
Baran	'Vassal'
Bëor	'Into Doriath shall no Man come while my realm lasts, not even those of the house of Bëor who serve Finrod the beloved.'
Al	'Let the Eldar look to it! Our lives are short enough.'
Bereg	'He hates us, rather, and ever the more the longer we dwell here, meddling in his quarrel with the Kings of the Eldar, to no gain of ours.'
Haleth	'My mind is now set, lord, to leave the shadow of the mountains, and go west, whither others of our kin have gone.'
Haleth	'Where are Haldad my father, and Haldar my brother? If the King of Doriath fears a friendship between Haleth and those who have devoured her kin, then the thoughts of the Eldar are strange to Men.'
Bregolas	's power overshadowed the Northlands; but Barahir would not flee from Dorthonion, and remained contesting the land foot by foot with his enemies. Then Morgoth pursued his people to the death, until few remained; and all the forest of the northward slopes of that land was turned little by little into a region of such dread and dark enchantment that even the Orcs would not enter it unless need drove them, and it was called Deldúwath, and Taur-nu-Fuin, The Forest under Nightshade. The trees that grew there after the burning were black and grim, and their roots were tangled, groping in the dark like claws; and those who strayed among them became lost and blind, and were strangled or pursued to madness by phantoms of terror. At last so desperate was the case of Barahir that Emeldir the Manhearted his wife (whose mind was rather to fight beside her son and her husband than to flee) gathered together all the women and children that were left, and gave arms to those that would bear them; and she led them into the mountains that lay behind, and so by perilous paths, until they came at last with loss and misery to Brethil. Some were there received among the Haladin, but some passed on over the mountains to Dor-lómin and the people of Galdor, Hador'
Haleth	's folk were shut in Hithlum, and Bëor'
Eldar	"Lord, we are but mortal Men, and unlike the Eldar. They may endure for long years awaiting battle with their enemies in some far distant day; but for us the time is short, and our hope and strength soon wither. Moreover we did not find the road to Gondolin, and indeed we do not know surely where this city stands; for we were brought in fear and wonder by the high ways of the air, and in mercy our eyes were veiled.'
Galdor	's grace is great indeed; but if our word is not enough, then we will swear oaths to you.'
Eilinel	'Nonetheless I will grant thy prayer,'
Thingol	'Let Beren speak!'
Beren	's side, and in whispered counsel bade him forgo his wrath. '
Arda	'Unhappy Men, children of little lords and brief kings, shall such as these lay hands on you, and yet live?'
Menegroth	'For little price,'
Menegroth	'O King, you have devised cunning counsel. But if my eyes have not lost their sight, it is ill for you, whether Beren fail in his errand, or achieve it. For you have doom either your daughter, or yourself. And now is Doriath drawn within the fate of a mightier realm.'
Beren	'I am Beren son of Barahir, friend of Felagund. Take me to the King!'
Silmaril	'Be he friend or foe, whether demon of Morgoth, of Elf, or child of Men, or any other living thing in Arda, neither law, nor love, nor league of hell, nor might of the Valar, nor any power of wizardry, shall defend him from the pursuing hate of Fëanor'
Edrahil	'Your oaths of faith to me you may break, but I must hold my bond. Yet if there be any on whom the shadow of out curse has not yet fallen, I should find at least a few to follow me, and should not go hence as a beggar that is thrust from the gates.'
Beren	'I go now to my long rest in the timeless halls beyond the seas and the Mountains of Aman. It will be long ere I am seen among the Noldor again; and it may be that we shall not meet a second time in death or life, for the fates of our kindreds are apart. Farewell!'
Valinor	's feet; and as he died he told his master: '
Celegorm	'Let it be so!'
Lúthien	'Your horse,'
Beren	'Go hence,'
Draugluin	's trail. Long he had pondered in his heart what counsel he could devise for the lightning of the peril of these two whom he loved. He turned aside therefore at Sauron'
Menegroth	'Thrice now I curse my oath to Thingol,'
Carcharoth	'O woe-begotten spirit, fall now into dark oblivion, and forget for a while the dreadful doom of life.'
Beren	'Get you gone, and fly!'
Beren	's aid, but when they looked upon what was done they cast aside their spears and wept. Then Mablung took a knife and ripped up the belly of the Wolf; and within he was well nigh all consumed as with a fire, but the hand of Beren that held the jewel was yet incorrupt. But when Mablung reached forth to touch it, the hand was no more, and the Silmaril lay there unveiled, and the light of it filled the shadows of the forest all about hem. Then quickly and in fear Mablung took it and set it in Beren'
Eldar	'Utúlie'
Gelmir	'We have many more such at home, but you must make haste if you would find them; for we shall deal with them all when we return even so.'
Morgoth	'Aurë entuluva! Day shall come again!'
Morgoth	's host, nor any of the Men of Hador'
Círdan	's walls, and the mariners passed up and down the coast and harried the enemy with swift landings. But in the next year, ere the winter was come, Morgoth sent great strength over Hithlum and Nevrast, and they came down the rivers Brithon and Nenning and ravaged all the Falas, and besieged the walls of Brithombar and Eglarest. Smiths and miners and makers of fire they brought with them, and they set up great engines; and valiantly though they were resisted they broke the walls at last. Then the Havens were laid in ruin, and the tower of Barad Nimras cast down; and the most part of Círdan'
Saeros	'If the Men of Hithlum are so wild and fell, of what sort are the women of that land? Do they run like deer clad only in their hair?'
Túrin	'I grieve, Cúthalion; for I took Húrin'
Taur-nu-Fuin	's pardon; and he sought to persuade him by all means that he might to return with him to Doriath, saying that there was great need of his strength and valour on the north marches of the realm. '
Túrin	'I do not remember it,'
Ana	'Never did we go so far from the borders,'
Túrin	'Is it farewell, then, son of Húrin?'
Beleg	'Give me leave, lord,'
Beleg	'I ask then for a sword of worth,'
Thingol	'Choose from all that I have,'
Beleg	'Nonetheless I will wield it while I may,'
Túrin	'Another gift I will give to you, Cúthalion,'
Al	's heart, and he said to Mîm: '
Elf	's thought again above his life in the wilderness as the leader of a petty company. But still Túrin would not return to Doriath; and Beleg yielding to his love against his wisdom remained with him, and did not depart, and in that time he laboured much for the good of Túrin'
Túrin	'Very tall he was'
Túrin	'Awake, Túrin son of Húrin Thalion! On Ivrin'
Túrin	'Who are you?'
Nirnaeth Arnoediad	'A wandering Elf, a thrall escaped, whom Beleg met and comforted,'
Túrin	'Then have you seen Húrin son of Galdor, the warrior of Dor-lómin?'
Morgoth	'I have not seen him,'
Túrin	'That I do believe,'
Nargothrond	's sake Túrin was admitted with him into Nargothrond, and he dwelt there in honour. But when Gwindor would tell his name, Túrin checked him, saying: '
Círdan	'Hear the words of the Lord of Waters!'
Finduilas	'Let bearing pay for bearing! But ill-fated was mine, and vain is thine; for my body is marred beyond healing, and I must leave Middle-earth. And though I love thee, son of Húrin, yet I rue the day that I took thee from the Orcs. But for thy prowess and thy pride, still I should have love and life, and Nargothrond should yet stand a while.'
Túrin	'Evil have been all thy ways, son of Húrin. Thankless fosterling, outlaw, slayer of thy friend, thief of love, usurper of Nargothrond, captain foolhardy, and deserter of thy kin. As thralls thy mother and thy sister live in Dor-lómin, in misery and want. Thou art arrayed as a prince, but they go in rags; and for thee they yearn, but thou carest not for that. Glad may thy father be to learn that he hath such a son; as learn he shall.'
Elf	's eyes; and Glaurung coiling back swiftly towered above him, and said: '
Túrin	's table, and seizing him he drew his sword, and demanded that he be told whither Morwen had gone; and Aerin declared to him that she went to Doriath to seek her son. '
Elf	's daughter of Nargothrond. Then Dorlas, the leader of those woodmen, told the grievous tidings of her death. For the Men of Brethil had waylaid at the Crossings of Teiglin the Orc-host that led the captives of Nargothrond, hoping to rescue them; but the Orcs had at once cruelly slain their prisoners, and Finduilas they pinned to a tree with a spear. So she died, saying at the last: '
Mablung	's command she would not go back; and Mablung perforce brought them to the hidden ferries at the Meres of Twilight, and they passed over Sirion. And after three days'
Níniel	'Do not be troubled. The tale shall wait. But I will give you a name, and I will call you Níniel, Tear-maiden.'
Túrin	's hand in the throe of Glaurung, and it clave to the belly of the dragon. Turambar therefore crossed the water once more, desiring to recover his sword and to look upon his foe; and he found him stretched at his length, and rolled upon one side, and the hilts of Gurthang stood in his belly. Then Turambar seized the hilts and set his foot upon the belly, and cried in mockery of the dragon and his words at Nargothrond: '
Níniel	'Turambar is dead, but Níniel lives. Now it may be that she will come with me, and I will lead her away, and so we shall escape from the dragon together.'
Níniel	'Is this the way?'
Brandir	'Farewell, O twice beloved! A Túrin Turambar turun ambartanen: master of doom by doom mastered! O happy to be dead!'
Turambar	'Níniel is gone for ever. The Dragon is dead, and Turambar is dead; and those tidings are good.'
Mablung	'This is a bitter jest indeed!'
Húrin	's madness and death, they were aghast; and Mablung said bitterly: '
Thorondor	'Not so,'
Húrin Thalion	'Then your words bode ill,'
Serech	'Turgon, Turgon, remember the Fen of Serech! O Turgon, will you not hear in your hidden halls?'
Morwen	'But you are too late,'
Morwen Eledhwen	'She was not conquered,'
Turambar	'Then you shall enjoy your inheritance no longer,'
Beren	'Receive thou thy fee,'
Menegroth	's intent; but being filled with pity he restrained his wrath, and endured Húrin'
Morgoth	's chair, and he gave it to him, saying: '
Elu Thingol	'By what right does the Elvenking lay claim to the Nauglamír, that was made by our fathers for Finrod Felagund who is dead? It has come to him but by the hand of Húrin the Man of Dor-lómin, who took it as a thief out of the darkness of Nargothrond.'
Fëanor	's heir wore the Nauglamír, and they said: '
Nirnaeth Arnoediad	'Love not too well the work of thy hands and the devices of thy heart; and remember that the true hope of the Noldor lieth in the West, and cometh from the Sea.'
Gondolin	's also. Therefore Idril and Tuor departed from Nan-tathren, and went southwards down the river to the sea; and they dwelt there by the mouths of Sirion, and joined their people to the company of Elwing Dior'
Aman	'Then would our paths be sundered for ever; but all thy perils I will take on myself also.'
Taniquetil	'Await me here; for one only may bring the message that it is my fate to bear.'
Tuor	'Shall mortal Man step living upon the undying lands, and yet live?'
Eönwë	'Choose thou, for now I am weary of the world.'
Morgoth	'If it be truly the Silmaril which we saw cast into the sea that rises again by the power of the Valar, then let us be glad; for its glory is seen now by many, and is yet secure from all evil.'
Maglor	'If none can release us,'
Gondolin	's daughter, Lúthien'
Aman	'The Doom of the World,'
Elendil	'Would you then betray the King?'
Aman	'If I thought that Manwë needed such a messenger,'
Aman	'It must not become known,'
Elendil	'And what shall that design be?'
Aman	'To meddle not in the war, and to watch,'
Eärendil	'For,'
Númen	'Behold the Eagles of the Lords of the West!'
Sauron	'The Lords of the West have plotted against us. They strike first. The next blow shall be ours!'
Meneldil	's death, and my brothers. Was it not I that dealt the Enemy his death-blow?'
Tulkas	'Keleborn'
Aredhel	'soft'
Eressëa	'The Thousand Caves'
Noldor	'the Elder King'
Túrin	'Elf-Man'
Herunúmen	'Lord of the West'
Tol Galen	'double stream'
Gil-galad	'Snow-point'
Aros	'Meres of Twilight'
Eärendil	'Sea-wanderer'
Túrin	'Blood-stained'
Ered Nimrais	'The Glittering Cavern'
Dorthonion	'The Narrow Pass'
Al	'The Music of the Ainur'
Maiar	'The Holy Ones'
Al	'The Downfallen'
Oromë	'Lord of Trees'
Elf	'Lament for the Two Trees'
Teleri	'Haven of the Swans'
Al	'Blessed, free from evil'
Númen	'Lover of Aman'
Númen	'Mount Doom'
Gelion	'The Lonely Hill'
Finrod	'The Hill of Spies'
Túrin	'The Bald Hill'
Arnor	'Hill of the Wind'
Númen	'Westernesse'
Númen	'The Land of Gift'
Beleriand	'The Long Wall'
Morgoth	'Iron Prison, Hell of Iron'
Gondolin	'Iron-delvings'
Númen	'Iron Fortress'
Beren	'Iron-cleaver'
Eldar	'Lord of Gifts'
Cirith Ninniach	'Gate of the Noldor'
Númen	'Tower of the West'
Númen	'King'
Valar	'The Exalted'
Manwë	'The Realm'
Calenardhon	'the Green Region'
Ar-Feiniel	'Noble Elf'
Anárion	'King-stones'
Númen	'Land of the King'
Númen	'The Golden'
Eärendil	's mouths. Cf. Bilbo'
Tulkas	'The Valiant'
Akallabêth	'The Downfallen'
Atani	'Fathers of Men'
Elf	'The Second People'
Eldar	'The Unwilling, the Refusers'
Aman	'The Shadows'
Morgoth	'Demon of Might'
Sauron	'The Dark Tower'
Noldor	'Tower of the Well'
Finrod	'White Horn Tower'
Túrin	'House of Ransom'
Túrin	'Strongbow'
Aman	'The Great Sea'
Gabilgathol	'Great Fortress'
Lindon	'the country of Balar'
Gondolin	'Divine radiance'
Tol Galen	's crown to be the bride-price of Lúthien Thingol'
Gelion	'Glittering Torrent'
Nienor	'Leap of Dreadful Doom'
Túna	'Cleft of Light'
Aman	'Elves of the Light'
Gondor	'The Green Province'
Beren	'Empty-handed'
Doriath	'the harshest of the brothers and the most quick to anger'
Anfauglir	'the Red Maw'
Eressëa	'Tree of Silver'
Anduin	'Silver Lode'
Eregion	'Hand of Silver'
Idril	'Silverfoof'
Brethil	'Silver Foam'
Teleri	'The Shipwright'
Tuor	'Rainbow Cleft'
Glorfindel	'Eagles'
Ezellohar	'The Green Mound'
Oromë	'Water of Awakening'
Saruman	'The one of cunning devices'
Beleg	'Strongbow'
Túrin	'Glaurung'
Beleriand	'The Glorious Battle'
Beleriand	'The Battle of Sudden Flame'
Al	'Battle Plain'
Fëanor	'The Battle-under-Stars'
Eöl	'and was not accounted among the Moriquendi'
Nen Girith	'the Rainy Stair'
Menegroth	'Thingol'
Sauron	'Hill of Sorcery'
Nogrod	'Wet Head'
Túrin	'Land of Bow and Helm'
Morgoth	'Land of the Shadow of Horror'
Esgalduin	'The Silent Land'
Beren	'Land of the Dead that Live'
Menegroth	'Land of the Pence'
Anfauglith	'Land under Choking Ash'
Dorthonion	'Land of Pines'
Númen	'The Edain of the West'
Hadhodrond	'Delving of the Dwarves'
Ilúvatar	'It is'
Beren	'Halfelven'
Tuor	'Sea-wing'
Gondolin	'The Encircling Mountains'
Teleri	'The Forsaken People'
Narog	'Ivrin'
Fingon	'Sirion'
Elentári	'Star-Queen'
Eldar	'The Elven-folk'
Aman	'Elvenhome'
Teleri	'People of the Stars'
Elendili	'Elf-friend'
Númen	'Elf-friends'
Númen	'Starwards'
Varda	'Star-Queen'
Taniquetil	'Crowned with Stars'
Elrond	'Star-dome'
Beren	'Heir of Elu (Thingol)'
Teleri	'Greymantle'
Lanlhir Lamath	'Star-spray'
Brethil	'The encircling fence of Brandir'
Gondor	'Fence of Shadow'
Beren	'One-handed'
Nan Dungortheb	'The Mountains of Terror'
Ered Luin	'The Mountains of Lindon'
Hithlum	'The Echoing Mountains'
Lindon	'The Blue Mountains'
Hithlum	'The Mountains of Shadow'
Noldor	'Land of Holly'
Fingon	'Scion of Kings'
Al	'The One'
Fëanor	'skill'
Lórien	'Masters of Spirits'
Finrod	'cave-hewer'
Beren	'the Faithful'
Fëanor	'Northern Fortress'
Númen	'Northern Fortress'
Silmaril	'Star of Hope'
Al	'Star of Radiance'
Laurelin	'Hanging Flame'
Turgon	'The Hidden Rock'
Númen	'Land of Stone'
Sindarin	'Masters of Stone'
Túrin	'Dread Helm'
Túrin	'Iron of Death'
Eregion	'People of the Jewel-smiths'
Galdor	'Goldenhead'
Haleth	'The Ladybarrow'
Nirnaeth Arnoediad	'The Mound of Slain'
Haudh-en-Ndengin	'The Mound of Tears'
Caranthir	'Black Glass'
Quenya	'Lord of the West'
Ilúvatar	'The Followers'
Celegorm	'Cool Plain'
Hithlum	'Land of Mist'
Hithaeglin	'Line of Misty Peaks'
Ered Lómin	'Land of Mist'
Galdor	'the Steadfast'
Esgalduin	'The Old Bridge'
Gondolin	'Silverfoot'
Elrond	'Rivendell'
Yavanna	'Queen of the Earth'
Túrin	'The Song of the Great Bow'
Ossiriand	'The Green-elves'
Húrin	'Laughter'
Morgoth	'The Great Echo'
Ossiriand	'Waterfall of Echoing Voices'
Valinor	'Song of Gold'
Quenya	'journey-bread'
Nevrast	'Lake of birds'
Maeglin	'Son of Twilight'
Hador	'Goldenhead'
Maedhros	'The wide and empty'
Lórien	'Lórien of the Blossom'
Menegroth	'of the Heavy Hand'
Eöl	'Sharp Glance'
Laurelin	'Tree of Gold'
Númen	'The Land under the Waves'
Belegur	'He who arises in Might'
Thingol	'The Thousand Caves'
Númen	'Pillar of Heaven'
Fingolfin	'Feast of Reuniting'
Mindolluin	'Tower of the Sun'
Ephel Dúath	'Tower of the Moon'
Minas Ithil	'Tower of Sorcery'
Finrod	'Tower of Watch'
Minas Anor	'Towering Blue-head'
Mindon	'Lofty Tower of the Eldalië'
Ephel Dúath	', also called the Land of Shadow; Sauron'
Hadhodrond	'The Black Chasm'
Gurthang	'The Black Sword'
Teleri	'Those who turn back'
Gorgoroth	'Valley of Dreadful Death'
Narog	'Willow-vale'
Glaurung	'The great underground fortress on the river Narog'
Fëanor	'The Tale of the Children of Húrin'
Thingol	'The Necklace of the Dwarves'
Sindarin	'The Stunted People'
Brethil	'Shuddering Water'
Annúminas	'Lake of Twilight'
Aman	'Hither Shore'
Túrin	'Mourning'
Quenya Ninquelótë	'White Blossom'
Túrin	'Tear-maiden'
Telperion	'White Blossom'
Beleriand	'Tears Unnumbered'
Fëanor	'The Fall of the Noldor'
Noldor	'the Wise'
Bëor	'Wisdom'
Edain	'Westernesse'
Isil	'Warrior'
Taniquetil	'Ever-snow-white'
Gondolin	'Stone Song'
Sauron	'Mountain of Blazing Fire'
Sindarin	'Horn-blowing'
Númen	'Forked Height'
Gondor	'Fortress of the Stars'
Lindon	'Land of Seven Rivers'
Eregion	'Fortress of the Eldar'
Fëanor	'Those that watch from afar'
Númen	'Garth of Royal Ships,'
Al	'The fencing or defensive heights'
Andram	'Wall'
Noldor	'The Wanderer'
Ascar	'Golden-bed'
Anduin	'Roaring Spray'
Calenardhon	'The Horse-country'
Rohan	'The Horse-lords'
Nogrod	'Ford of Stones'
Curunír	'Man of Skill'
Sindarin	'The Abhorred'
Amon Rûdh	'Blood of Stone'
Míriel	'The Broideress'
Grey	's name Thingol (Quenya Sindacollo, Singollo '
Grey	'Grey-cloak'
Sirion	'The Great River'
Varda	'High White Peak'
Inziladûn	'He who looks afar'
Andram	'The Forest between Rivers'
Deldúwath	'the Forest under Night'
Al	'The Forester'
Húrin	'Steadfast, Strong'
Morgoth	'Mountains of Tyranny'
Ascar	'The Land beyond Gelion'
Teleri	'Grey-cloak'
Thorondor	'King of Eagles'
Angband	'Woman of Secret Shadow'
Varda	'The Kindler'
Lúthien	'Daughter of Twilight'
Túna	'Great Watch-tower'
Teleri	'The Lonely Isle'
Beren	'The Green Isle'
Sauron	'Isle of Werewolves'
Arda	'greatest in strength and deeds of prowess'
Gondolin	'The Wide Valley'
Túrin	'Master of Doom'
Rainer	'The Pourer'
Aman	'Those not of Aman'
Túrin	'Ill-fate'
Mandos	'The Weaver'
Silmarilli	'Account of the Valar'
Arda	'Those with Power'
Sindarin	'Demons of Might'
Val	'The Queens of the Valar'
Vanyar	'the Fair'
Varda	'The Exalted'
Noldor	'The Consumer'
Eärendil	'Foam-flower'
Nirnaeth Arnoediad	'The Steadfast'
Quenya	'butterfly'
Kementári	'Giver of fruits'
Al	'glory, brilliance'
Ainur	'holy'
Al	'tree'
Al	'swan'
Turambar	'doom'
Sindarin	'hill'
Andram	'long'
Eldarin	'sunset, west'
Gurthang	'iron'
Annatar	'gift'
Gelydh	'great door or gate'
Sindarin	'beside, outside'
Aradan	'high, noble, royal'
Atanatári	'father'
Sindarin	'prison, duress'
Bar-en-Danwedh	'dwelling'
Barad Nimras	'tower'
Laer Cú Beleg	'mighty'
Dagor Bragollach	'sudden'
Fimbrethil	'silver birch'
Tol Galen	'green'
Camlost	'hand'
Sindarin	'fang'
Carnil	'red'
Celebrindal	'silver'
Cerin Amroth	'mound'
Laer Cú Beleg	'bow'
Sindarin	'awakening'
Culúrien	'golden-red'
Curunír	'skill'
Daeron	'shadow'
Dagnir	'battle'
Dor Daedeloth	'horror* in Deldúwath; deloth '
Amon Dîn	'silent'
Mindolluin	'head'
Dorthonion	'land'
Draugluin	'wolf'
Deldúwath	'night, dimness'
Esgalduin	'(long) river'
Sindarin	'sea'
Glóredhel	'elf'
Mitheithel	'well'
Eledhwen	'star'
Eru	'one, alone'
Eregion	'thorn, holly'
Esgalduin	'screen, hiding'
Gondor	'shore, line of surf'
Hunter	'hunt, pursue'
Anfauglith	'gape'
Fëanor	'spirit'
Finduilas	'hair'
Sindarin	'north'
Taur-nu-Fuin	'gloom, darkness'
Sindarin	'sea'
Osgiliath	'star'
Nen Girith	'shuddering'
Maeglin	'gleam'
Gonnhirrim	'stone'
Gorthol	'horror, dread'
Menegroth	'delving, underground dwelling'
Sindarin	'sorcery'
Gurthang	'death'
Grey	'people'
Deldúwath	'shadow'
Haudh-en-Elleth	'mound'
Barahir	'lord'
Himring	'cool'
Eru	'children'
Sindarin	'mist'
Glamhoth	'host, horde'
Sindarin	'south'
Doriath	'fence'
Iarwain	'old'
Varda	'mansion of the high airs'
Ilúvatar	'the whole, the all'
Al	' (gal-) This root, meaning '
Fingon	'commander'
Sindarin	'go away'
Kementári	'earth'
Sindarin	'ice'
Eluchíl	'follow'
Círdan	'cut, cleave'
Ephel Dúath	'plain, valley'
Laurelin	'gold'
Eöl	'leaping flame'
Linaewen	'pool, mere'
Laurelin	'sing, make a musical sound'
Anfauglith	'ash'
Sindarin	'bend, loop'
Lanthir Lamath	'echo'
Al	'land-locked haven'
Sindarin	'snow'
Ninquelótë	'flower'
Mindolluin	'blue'
Maeglin	'sharp, piercing'
Malinalda	'gold'
Aman	'good, blessed, unmarred'
Sindarin	'love'
Númen	'way'
Menelmacar	'the heavens'
Annúminas	'tower'
Atanamir	'jewel'
Mitheithel	'grey'
Morgoth	'dark'
Nan Elmoth	'dusk'
Nan Dungortheb	'valley'
Fëanor	'fire'
Nogrod	'dwarf'
Mardil	'devotion'
Hírilorn	'beech'
Emyn Arnen	'water'
Ered Nimrais	'white'
Hírilorn	'tree'
Lindon	'mountain'
Angrenost	'fortress'
Tar-Palantir	'far and wide'
Ephel Dúath	'go round, encircle'
Silmarilli	'say, speak'
Andram	'wall'
Gilraen	'wander, stray'
Ered Nimrais	'horn'
Sindarin	'demon'
Silmaril	'brilliance'
Naugrim	'great number, host'
Gondor	'cold, chill'
Angrist	'cleave'
Rohirrim	'horse'
Sindarin	'uprising, sunrise, east'
Cair Andros	'foam, spindrift, spray'
Orodruin	'red flame'
Aranrúth	'anger'
Serni	'(small) stone'
Quenya	'blood'
Silmarilli	'shine (with white or silver light)'
Grey	'river'
Amon Sûl	'wind'
Celebrindal	'foot'
Talath Rhunen	'flat lands, plain'
Annatar	'high'
Quenya	'willow'
Taur-nu-Fuin	'wood, forest'
Teleri	'finish, end, be last'
Cúthalion	'strong, dauntless'
Gondor	'oppression'
Arnor	'athwart, across'
Gorthaur	'abominable, abhorrent'
Thingol	'grey'
Gorthol	'helm'
Dorthonion	'pine-tree'
Cirith Thoronath	'eagle'
Taniquetil	'point, horn'
Sindarin	'sparkle'
Tar-Palantir	'watch, watch over'
Tol Galen	'isle'
Sindarin	'valley'
Turambar	'power, mastery'
Nirnaeth Arnoediad	'heat, be hot'
Sindarin	'power'
Eärwen	'maiden'
Elwing	'foam, spray'
Yavannie	'fruit'
Silmarilli	' now not only in their derivation from the remote First Age, but also in terms of my father'
Ilúvatar	'Of the theme that I have declared to you, I will now that ye make in harmony together a Great Music. And since I have kindled you with the Flame Imperishable, ye shall show forth your powers in adorning this theme, each with his own thoughts and devices, if he will. But I win sit and hearken, and be glad that through you great beauty has been wakened into song.'
Ilúvatar	'Mighty are the Ainur, and mightiest among them is Melkor; but that he may know, and all the Ainur, that I am Ilúvatar, those things that ye have sung, I will show them forth, that ye may see what ye have done. And thou, Melkor, shalt see that no theme may be played that hath not its uttermost source in me, nor can any alter the music in my despite. For he that attempteth this shall prove but mine instrument in the devising of things more wonderful, which he himself hath not imagined.'
Ainur	'Behold your Music! This is your minstrelsy; and each of you shall find contained herein, amid the design that I set before you, all those things which it may seem that he himself devised or added. And thou, Melkor, wilt discover all the secret thoughts of thy mind, and wilt perceive that they are but a part of the whole and tributary to its glory.'
Ulmo	'Seest thou not how here in this little realm in the Deeps of Time Melkor hath made war upon thy province? He hath bethought him of bitter cold immoderate, and yet hath not destroyed the beauty of thy fountains, nor of my clear pools. Behold the snow, and the cunning work of frost! Melkor hath devised heats and fire without restraint, and hath not dried up thy desire nor utterly quelled the music of the sea. Behold rather the height and glory of the clouds, and the everchanging mists; and listen to the fall of rain upon the Earth! And in these clouds thou art drawn nearer to Manwë, thy friend, whom thou lovest.'
Ulmo	'Truly, Water is become now fairer than my heart imagined, neither had my secret thought conceived the snowflake, nor in all my music was contained the falling of the rain. I will seek Manwë, that he and I may make melodies for ever to my delight!'
Melkor	'This shall be my own kingdom; and I name it unto myself!'
Arda	'This kingdom thou shalt not take for thine own, wrongfully, for many others have laboured here do less than thou.'
Ilúvatar	'Behold I love the Earth, which shall be a mansion for the Quendi and the Atani! But the Quendi shall be the fairest of all earthly creatures, and they shall have and shall conceive and bring forth more beauty than all my Children; and they shall have the greater bliss in this world. But to the Atani I will give a new gift.'
Ilúvatar	'These too in their time shall find that all that they do redounds at the end only to the glory of my work.'
Aulë	'Why hast thou done this? Why dost thou attempt a thing which thou knowest is beyond thy power and thy authority? For thou hast from me as a gift thy own bring only, and no more; and therefore the creatures of thy hand and mind can live only by that being, moving when thou thinkest to move them, and if thy thought be elsewhere, standing idle. Is that thy desire?'
Aulë	'I did not desire such lordship. I desired things other than I am, to love and to teach them, so that they too might perceive the beauty of Eä, which thou hast caused to be. For it seemed to me that there is great room in Arda for many things that might rejoice in it, yet it is for the most part empty still, and dumb. And in my impatience I have fallen into folly. Yet the making of thing is in my heart from my own making by thee; and the child of little understanding that makes a play of the deeds of his father may do so without thought of mockery, but because he is the son of his father. But what shall I do now, so that thou be not angry with me for ever? As a child to his father, I offer to thee these things, the work of the hands which thou hast made. Do with them what thou wilt. But should I not rather destroy the work of my presumption?'
Aulë	'May Eru bless my work and amend it!'
Ilúvatar	'Even as I gave being to the thoughts of the Ainur at the beginning of the World, so now I have taken up thy desire and given to it a place therein; but in no other way will I amend thy handiwork, and as thou hast made it, so shall it be. But I will not suffer this: that these should come before the Firstborn of my design, nor that thy impatience should be rewarded. They shall sleep now in the darkness under stone, and shall not come forth until the Firstborn have awakened upon Earth; and until that time thou and they shall wait, though long it seem. But when the time comes I will awaken them, and they shall be to thee as children; and often strife shall arise between thine and mine, the children of my adoption and the children of my choice.'
Yavanna	'Eru is merciful. Now I see that thy heart rejoiceth, as indeed it may; for thou hast received not only forgiveness but bounty. Yet because thou hiddest this thought from me until its achievement, thy children will have little love for the things of my love. They will love first the things made by their own hands, as doth their father. They will delve in the earth, and the things that grow and live upon the earth they will not heed. Many a tree shall feel the bite of their iron without pity.'
Aulë	'That shall also be true of the Children of Ilúvatar; for they will eat and they will build. And though the things of thy realm have worth in themselves, and would have worth if no Children were to come, yet Eru will give them dominion, and they shall use all that they find in Arda: though not, by the purpose of Eru, without respect or without gratitude.'
Yavanna	'King of Arda, is it true, as Aulë hath said to me, that the Children when they come shall have dominion over all the things of my labour, to do as they will therewith?'
Manwë	'But why dost thou ask, for thou hadst no need of the teaching of Aulë?'
Yavanna	'Because my heart is anxious, thinking of the days to come. All my works are dear to me. Is it not enough that Melkor should have marred so many? Shall nothing that I have devised be free from the dominion of others?'
Manwë	'Of all thy realm what dost thou hold dearest?'
Al	'and each contributes to the worth of the others. But the kelvar can flee or defend themselves, whereas the olvar that grow cannot. And among these I hold trees dear. Long in the growing, swift shall they be in the felling, and unless they pay toll with fruit upon bough little mourned in their passing. So I see in my thought. Would that the trees might speak on behalf of all things that have roots, and punish those that wrong them!'
Yavanna	'For while thou wert in the heavens and with Ulmo built the clouds and poured out the rains, I lifted up the branches of great trees to receive them, and some sang to Ilúvatar amid the wind and the rain.'
Kementári	" But dost them not now remember, Kementári, that thy thought sang not always alone? Did not thy thought and mine meet also, so that we took wing together like great birds that soar above the clouds? That also shall come to be by the heed of Ilúvatar, and before the Children awake there shall go forth with wings like the wind the Eagles of the Lords of the West.'
Yavanna	'High shall climb the trees of Kementári, that the Eagles of the King may house therein!'
Eru	'Now let thy children beware! For there shall walk a power in the forests whose wrath they will arouse at their peril.'
Yavanna	'Ye mighty of Arda, the Vision of Ilúvatar was brief and soon taken away, so that maybe we cannot guess within a narrow count of days the hour appointed. Yet be sure of this: the hour approaches, and within this age our hope shall be revealed, and the Children shall awake. Shall we then leave the lands of their dwelling desolate and full of evil? Shall they walk in darkness while we have light? Shall they call Melkor lord while Manwë sits upon Taniquetil?'
Tulkas	'Nay! Let us make war swiftly! Have we not rested from strife overlong, and is not our strength now renewed? Shall one alone contest with us for ever?'
Mandos	'In this age the Children of Ilúvatar shall come indeed, but they come not yet. Moreover it is doom that the Firstborn shall come in the darkness, and shall look first upon the stars. Great light shall be for their waning. To Varda ever shall they call at need.'
Valar	'This is the counsel of Ilúvatar in my heart: that we should take up again the mastery of Arda, at whatsoever cost, and deliver the Quendi from the shadow of Melkor.'
Quendi	'So it is doomed.'
Fëanor	's skill of hand; and the youngest Amrod and Amras, who were twin brothers, alike in mood and face. In later days they were great hunters in the woods of Middle-earth; and a hunter also was Celegorm, who in Valinor was a friend of Oromë, and often followed the Vala'
Serindë	'Never again shall I bear child; for strength that would have nourished the life of many has gone forth into Fëanor.'
Aman	'Surely there is healing in Aman? Here all weariness can find rest.'
Fëanor	'Beware! Small love has the proud son of Míriel ever had for the children of Indis. Now he has become great, and he has his father in his hand. It will not be long before he drives you forth from Túna!'
Fingolfin	'King and father, wilt thou not restrain the pride of our brother, Curufinwë, who is called the Spirit of Fire, all too truly? By what right does he speak for all our people, as if he were King? Thou it was who long ago spoke before the Quendi, bidding them accept the summons of the Valar to Aman. Thou it was that led the Noldor upon the long road through the perils of Middle-earth to the light of Eldamar. If thou dost not now repent of it, two sons at least thou hast to honour thy words.'
Fëanor	'Get thee gone, and take thy due place!'
Fëanor	'This is sharper than thy tongue. Try but once more to usurp my place and the love of my father, and maybe it will rid the Noldor of one who seeks to be the master of thralls.'
Tulkas	'Thou speakest of thraldom. If thraldom it be, thou canst not escape it; for Manwë is King of Arda, and not of Aman only. And this deed was unlawful, whether in Aman or not in Aman. Therefore this doom is now made: for twelve years thou shall leave Tirion where this threat was uttered. In that time take counsel with thyself, and remember who and what thou art. But after that time this matter shall be set in peace and held redressed, if others will release thee.'
Fingolfin	'I will release my brother.'
Fëanor	'Behold the truth of all that I have spoken, and how thou art banished unjustly. But if the heart of Fëanor is yet free and bold as were his words in Tirion, then I will aid him, and bring him far from this narrow land. For am I not Vala also? Yea, and more than those who sit in pride in Valimar; and I have ever been a friend to the Noldor, most skilled and most valiant of the people of Arda.'
Fëanor	'Here is a strong place, and well guarded; but think not that the Silmarils will lie safe in any treasury within the realm of the Valar!'
Fëanor	'Get thee gone from my gate, thou jail-crow of Mandos!'
Aman	'Do as I bid; and if thou hunger still when all is done, then I will give thee whatsoever thy lust may demand. Yea, with both hands.'
Fëanor	'As I promised, I do now. I release thee, and remember no grievance.'
Fëanor	'Half-brother in blood, full brother in heart will I be. Thou shalt lead and I will follow. May no new grief divide as.'
Fëanor	'So be it.'
Yavanna	"The Light of the Trees has passed away, and lives now only in the Silmarils of Fëanor. Foresighted was he! Even for those who are mightiest under Ilúvatar there is some work that they may accomplish once, and once only. The Light of the Trees I brought into being, and within Eä I can do so never again. Yet had I but a little of that light I could recall life to the Trees, ere their roots decay; and then our hurt should be healed, and the malice of Melkor be confounded.'
Manwë	'Hearest thou, Fëanor son of Finwë, the words of Yavanna? Wilt thou grant what she would ask?'
Tulkas	'Speak, O Noldo, yea or nay! But who shall deny Yavanna? And did not the light of the Silmarils come from her work in the beginning?'
Aulë	'Be not hasty! We ask a greater thing than thou knowest. Let him have peace yet awhile.'
Fëanor	'For the less even as for the greater there is some deed that he may accomplish but once only; and in that deed his heart shall rest. It may be that I can unlock my jewels, but never again shall I make their like; and if I must break them, I shall break my heart, and I shall be slain; first of all the Eldar in Aman.'
Fëanor	'This thing I will not do of free will. But if the Valar will constrain me, then shall I know indeed that Melkor is of their kindred.'
Mandos	'Thou hast spoken.'
Morgoth	'Dost thou desire all the world for thy belly? I did not vow to give thee that. I am its Lord.'
Ungoliant	'But thou hast a great treasure from Formenos; I will have all that. Yea, with both hands thou shalt give it'
Morgoth	'with the left only. Open thy right hand.'
Silmaril	'Thou hast had thy doe. For with my power that I put into thee thy work was accomplished. I need thee no more. These things thou shalt not have, nor see. I name them unto myself for ever. '
Noldor	'why should we longer serve the jealous Valar, who cannot keep us nor even their own realm secure from their Enemy? And though he be now their foe, are not they and he of one kin? Vengeance calls me hence, but even were it otherwise I would not dwell longer in the same land with the kin of my father'
Eldar	' he cried, though long and hard shall be the road! Say farewell to bondage! But say farewell also to ease! Say farewell to the weak! Say farewell to your treasures! More still shall we make. Journey light: but bring with you your swords! For we will go further than Oromë, endure longer than Tulkas: we will never turn back from pursuit. After Morgoth to the ends of the Earth! War shall he have and hatred undying. But when we have conquered and have regained the Silmarils, then we and we alone shall be lords of the unsullied Light, and masters of the bliss and beauty of Arda. No other race shall oust us!'
Amras	's end. Fingolfin and Turgon his son therefore spoke against Fëanor, and fierce words awoke, so that once again wrath came near to the edge of swords. But Finarfin spoke softly, as was his wont, and sought to calm the Noldor, persuading them to pause and ponder ere deeds were done that could not be undone; and Orodreth, alone of his sons, spoke in like manner. Finrod was with Turgon, his friend; but Galadriel, the only woman of the Noldor to stand that day tall and valiant among the contending princes, was eager to be gone. No oaths she swore, but the words of Fëanor concerning Middle-earth had kindled in her heart, for she yearned to see the wide unguarded lands and to rule there a realm at her own will. Of like mind with Galadriel was Fingon Fingolfin'
Fëanor	'Nay, let us be gone!'
Fëanor	's son, by thine oath art exiled. The lies of Melkor thou shalt unlearn in bitterness. Vala he is, thou saist Then thou hast sworn in vain, for none of the Valar canst thou overcome now or ever within the halls of Eä, not though Eru whom thou namest had made thee thrice greater than thou art.'
Fëanor	'So! Then will this valiant people send forth the heir of their King alone into banishment with his sons only, and return to their bondage? But if any will come with me, I say to them: Is sorrow foreboded to you? But in Aman we have seen it. In Aman we have come through bliss to woe. The other now we will try: through sorrow to find joy; or freedom, at the least.'
Teleri	'Yet you were glad indeed to receive our aid when you came at last to these shores, fainthearted loiterers, and wellnigh emptyhanded. In huts on the beaches would yon be dwelling still, had not the Noldor carved out your haven and toiled upon your walls.'
Olwë	's folly. And when the Noldor welcomed us and gave us aid, otherwise then you spoke: in the land of Aman we were to dwell for ever, as brothers whose houses stand side by side. But as for our white ships: those you gave us not. We learned not that craft from the Noldor, but from the Lords of the Sea; and the white timbers we wrought with our own hands, and the white sails were woven by our wives and our daughters. Therefore we will neither give them nor sell them for any league or friendship. For I say to you, Fëanor son of Finwë, these are to us as are the gems of the Noldor: the work of our hearts, whose like we shall not make again.'
Aman	's shadow. For though Eru appointed to you to die not in Eä, and no sickness may assail you, yet slain ye may be, and slain ye shall be: by weapon and by torment and by grief; and your houseless spirits shall come then to Mandos. There long shall ye abide and yearn for your bodies, and find little pity though all whom ye have slain should entreat for you. And those that endure in Middle-earth and come not to Mandos shall grow weary of the world as with a great burden, and shall wane, and become as shadows of regret before the younger race that cometh after. The Valar have spoken.'
Fëanor	'We have sworn, and not lightly. This oath we will keep. We are threatened with many evils, and treason not least; but one thing is not said: that we shall suffer from cowardice, from cravens or the fear of cravens. Therefore I say that we will go on, and this doom I add: the deeds that we shall do shall be the matter of song until the last days of Arda.'
Fëanor	'Now what ships and rowers will you spare to return, and whom shall they bear hither first? Fingon the valiant?'
Fëanor	'None and none! What I have left behind I count now no loss; needless baggage on the road it has proved. Let those that cursed my name, curse me still, and whine their way back to the cages of the Valar! Let the ships burn!'
Thingol	'in the land east of the mountains, and your ancient kindred that dwell there are flying from the plains to the hills.'
Arda	'So shall it be! Dear-bought those songs shall be accounted, and yet shall be well-bought. For the price could be no other. Thus even as Eru spoke to us shall beauty not before conceived be brought into Eä, and evil yet be good to have been.'
Mandos	'And yet remain evil. To me shall Fëanor come soon.'
Morgoth	'O King to whom all birds are dear, speed now this feathered shaft, and recall some pity for the Noldor in their need!'
Fëanor	'If there lay no grievance between us, lord, still the kingship would rightly come to you, the eldest here of the house of Finwë, and not the least wise.'
Al	's house were suffered to pass within the confines of Doriath; for they could claim close kinship with King Thingol himself, since their mother was Eärwen of Alqualondë, Olwë'
Menegroth	'Thus shall you speak for me to those that sent you. In Hithlum the Noldor have leave to dwell, and in the highlands of Dorthonion, and in the lands east of Doriath that are empty and wild; but elsewhere there are many of my people, and I would not have them restrained of their freedom, still less ousted from their homes. Beware therefore how you princes of the West bear yourselves; for I am the Lord of Beleriand, and all who seek to dwell there shall hear my word. Into Doriath none shall come to abide but only such as I call as guests, or who seek me in great need.'
Fëanor	'A king is he that can hold his own, or else his title is vain. Thingol does but grant us lands where his power does not run. Indeed Doriath alone would be his realm this day, but for the coming of the Noldor. Therefore in Doriath let him reign, and be glad that he has the sons of Finwë for his neighbours, not the Orcs of Morgoth that we found. Elsewhere it shall go as seems good to us."
Caranthir	'Yea more! Let not the sons of Finarfin run hither and thither with their tales to this Dark Elf in his caves! Who made them our spokesmen to deal with him? And though they be come indeed to Beleriand, let them not so swiftly forget that their father is a lord of the Noldor, though their mother be of other kin.'
Gondolin	'Now thou shalt go at last to Gondolin, Turgon; and I will maintain my power in the Vale of Sirion, and in all the waters therein, so that none shall mark thy going, nor shall any find there the hidden entrance against thy will. Longest of all the realms of the Eldalië shall Gondolin stand against Melkor. But love not too well the work of thy hands and the devices of thy heart; and remember that the true hope of the Noldor lieth in the West and cometh from the Sea.'
Mandos	'that the curse of the Noldor shall find thee too ere the end, and treason awake within thy walls. Then they shall be in peril of fire. But if this peril draweth nigh indeed, then even from Nevrast one shall come to warn thee, and from him beyond ruin and fire hope shall be born for Elves and Men. Leave therefore in this house arms and a sword, that in years to come he may find them, and thus shalt thou know him, and not be deceived.'
Gondolin	'There is some woe that lies upon you and your kin. That I can see in you, but all else is hidden from me; for by no vision or thought can I perceive anything that passed or passes in the West: a shadow lies over all the land of Aman, and reaches far out over the sea. Why will you not tell me more?'
Galadriel	'and I would take what joy is here left, untroubled by memory. And maybe there is woe enough yet to come, though still hope may seem bright.'
Olwë	's brother, and his own folk that went over the sea. For what cause, Galadriel, were the high people of the Noldor driven forth as exiles from Aman? Or what evil lies on the sons of Fëanor that they are so haughty and so fell? Do I not strike near the truth?'
Galadriel	'save that we were not driven forth, but came of our own will, and against that of the Valar. And through great peril and in despite of the Valar for this purpose we came: to take vengeance upon Morgoth, and regain what he stole.'
Silmaril	'Now much you tell me, and yet more I perceive. A darkness you would cast over the long road from Tirion, but I see evil there, which Thingol should learn for his guidance.'
Galadriel	'but not of me.'
Silmaril	'greater indeed than the Noldor themselves understand; for the Light of Aman and the fate of Arda lie locked now in these things, the work of Fëanor, who is gone. They shall not be recovered, I foretell, by any power of the Eldar; and the world shall be broken in battles that are to come, ere they are wrested from Morgoth. See now! Fëanor they have slain, and many another, as I guess; but first of all the deaths they have brought and yet shall bring was Finwë your friend. Morgoth slew him, ere he fled from Aman.'
Thingol	'Now at last I understand the coming of the Noldor out of the West, at which I wondered much before. Not to our aid did they come (save by chance); for those that remain in Middle-earth the Valar will leave to their own devices, until the uttermost need. For vengeance and redress of their loss the Noldor came. Yet all the more sure shall they be as allies against Morgoth, with whom it is not now to be thought that they shall ever make treaty.'
Melian	'Truly for these causes they came; but for others also. Beware of the sons of Fëanor! The shadow of the wrath of the Valar lies upon them; and they have done evil, I perceive, both in Aman and to their own kin. A grief but lulled to sleep lies between the princes of the Noldor.'
Thingol	'What is that to me? Of Fëanor I have heard but report, which makes him great indeed. Of his sons I hear little to my pleasure; yet they are likely to prove the deadliest foes of our foe.'
Thingol	'Ill have you done to me, kinsman, to conceal so great matters from me. For now I have learned of all the evil deeds of the Noldor.'
Finrod	'What ill have I done yon, lord? Or what evil deed have the Noldor done in all your realm to grieve you? Neither against your kinship nor against any of your people have they thought evil or done evil.'
Eärwen	'that you would come to the board of your kinsman thus red-handed from the slaying of your mothers kin, and yet say naught in defence, nor yet seek any pardon!'
Thingol	'Lord, I know not what lies you have heard, nor whence; but we came not red-handed. Guiltless we came forth, save maybe of folly, to listen to the words of fell Fëanor, and become as if besotted with wine, and as briefly. No evil did we do on our road, but suffered ourselves great wrong; and forgave it. For this we are named tale-bearers to you and treasonable to the Noldor: untruly as you know, for we have of our loyalty been silent before you, and thus earned your anger. But now these charges are no longer to be borne, and the truth yon shall know.'
Al	'Wherefore should we that endured the Grinding Ice bear the name of kinslayers and traitors?'
Thingol	'For my heart is hot within me. Later you may return, if you will; for I will not shut my doors for ever against you, my kindred, that were ensnared in an evil that you did not aid. With Fingolfin and his people also I will keep friendship, for they have bitterly atoned for such ill as they did. And in our hatred of the Power that wrought all this woe our griefs shall be lost. But hear my words! Never again in my ears shall be heard the tongue of those who slew my kin in Alqualondë! Nor in all my realm shall it be openly spoken, while my power endures. All the Sindar shall hear my command that they shall neither speak with the tongue of the Noldor nor answer to it. And all such as use it shall be held slayers of kin and betrayers of kin unrepentant.'
Finrod	'An oath I too shall swear, and must be free to fulfil it, and go into darkness. Nor shall anything of my realm endure that a son should inherit.'
Ar-Feiniel	'Go then, if you will though it is against my wisdom, and I forebode that ill will come of it both to you and to me. But you shall go only to seek Fingon, our brother; and those that I send with you shall return hither to Gondolin as swiftly as they may.'
Aredhel	'I am your sister and not your servant, and beyond your bounds I will go as seems good to me. And if you begrudge me an escort, then I will go alone.'
Turgon	'I grudge you nothing that I have. Yet I desire that none shall dwell beyond my walls who know the way hither: and if I trust you, my sister, others I trust less to keep guard on their tongues.'
Aredhel	' Then Aredhel departed from Gondolin, and Turgon'
Fëanor	'To the land of Celegorm for which you seek, Lady, you may by no means pass through the realm of King Thingol; you must ride beyond the Girdle of Melian, to the south or to the north. The speediest way is by the paths that lead east from the Brithiach through Dimbar and along the north-march of this kingdom, until you pass the Bridge of Esgalduin and the Fords of Aros, and come to the lands that lie behind the Hill of Himring. There dwell, as we believe, Celegorm and Curufin, and it may be that you will find them; but the road is perilous.'
Eöl	'and not of the Golodhrim. All this land is the land of the Teleri, and I will not deal nor have my son deal with the slayers of our kin, the invaders and usurpers of our homes. In this you shall obey me, or I will set you in bonds.'
Eöl	'Lady, let us depart while there is time? What hope is there in this wood for you or for me? Here we are held in bondage, and no profit shall I find here; for I have learned all that my father has to teach, or that the Naugrim will reveal to me. Shall we not seek for Gondolin? You shall be my guide, and I will be your guard!'
Eöl	'What errand have you, Dark Elf, in my lands? An urgent matter, perhaps, that keeps one so sun-shy abroad by day.'
Eöl	'that my son and my wife, the White Lady of Gondolin, have ridden to visit you while I was from home; and it seemed to me fitting that I should join them on this errand.'
Eöl	'They might have found their welcome here less warm than they hoped, had you accompanied them; but it is no matter, for that was not their errand. It is not two days since they passed over the Arossiach, and thence rode swiftly westward. It seems that you would deceive me; unless indeed you yourself have been deceived.'
Eöl	'Then, lord, perhaps you will give me leave to go, and discover the truth of this matter.'
Curufin	'The sooner you depart from my land the better will it please me.'
Eöl	'For those who steal the daughters of the Noldor and wed them without gift or leave do not gain kinship with their kin. I have given you leave to go. Take it, and be gone. By the laws of the Eldar I may not slay you at this time. And this counsel I add: return now to your dwelling in the darkness of Nan El-moth; for my heart warns me that if you now pursue those who love you no more, never will you return thither.'
Ar-Feiniel	'and now more fair again shall my city seem than in the days when I deemed her lost. And Maeglin shall have the highest honour in my realm.'
Maeglin	's kindred, and she seemed to him as the sun from which all the King'
Eöl	's judgement, if the King so wills.'
Eöl	"Welcome, kinsman, for so I hold you. Here you shall dwell at your pleasure, save only that you must here abide and depart not from my kingdom; for it is my law that none who finds the way hither shall depart.'
Eöl	'No right have you or any of your kin in this land to seize realms or to set bounds, either here or there. This is the land of the Teleri, to which you bring war and all unquiet, dealing ever proudly and unjustly. I care nothing for your secrets and I came not to spy upon you, but to claim my own: my wife and my son. Yet if in Aredhel your sister you have some claim, then let her remain; let the bird go back to the cage, where soon she will sicken again, as she sickened before. But not so Maeglin. My son you shall not withhold from me. Come, Maeglin son of Eöl! Your father commands you. Leave the house of his enemies and the slayers of his kin, or be accursed!'
Turgon	'I will not debate with you. Dark Elf. By the swords of the Noldor alone are your sunless woods defended. Your freedom to wander there wild you owe to my kin; and but for them long since you would have laboured in thraldom in the pits of Angband. And here I am King; and whether you will it or will it not, my doom is law. This choice only is given to you: to abide here, or to die here; and so also for your son.'
Eöl	'So you forsake your father and his kin, ill-gotten son! Here shall you fail of all your hopes, and here may you yet die the same death as I.'
Quendi	'and we have turned our backs upon it, and we do not desire to return thither even in thought. Westwards our hearts have been turned, and we believe that there we shall find Light.'
Bëor	'and they are wandering not far away; and the Haladin, a people from whom we are sundered in speech, are still in the valleys on the eastern slopes, awaiting tidings before they venture further. There are yet other Men, whose tongue is more like to ours, with whom we have had dealings at times. They were before us on the westward march, but we passed them; for they are a numerous people, and yet keep together and move slowly, being all ruled by one chieftain whom they call Marach.'
Eldar	'if you have power over these newcomers, bid them return by the ways that they came, or else to go forward. For we desire no strangers in this land to break the peace in which we live. And these folk are hewers of trees and hunters of beasts; therefore we are their unfriends, and if they will not depart we shall afflict them in all ways that we can.'
Amras	'Vassal'
Thingol	's house, shall indeed come, and the Girdle of Melian shall not restrain him, for doom greater than my power shall send him; and the songs that shall spring from that coming shall endure when all Middle-earth is changed.'
Bereg	'We took long roads, desiring to escape the perils of Middle-earth and the dark things that dwell there; for we heard that there was Light in the West. But now we learn that the Light is beyond the Sea. Thither we cannot come where the Gods dwell in bliss. Save one; for the Lord of the Dark is here before us, and the Eldar, wise but fell, who make endless war upon him. In the North he dwells, they say; and there is the pain and death from which we fled. We will not go that way.'
Bereg	'Truly from the Dark King come all the evils from which we fled; but he seeks dominion over all Middle-earth, and whither now shall we turn and he will not pursue us? Unless he be vanquished here, or at least held in leaguer. Only by the valour of the Eldar is he restrained, and maybe it was for this purpose, to aid them at need, that we were brought into this land.'
Bereg	'All this is but Elvish lore, tales to beguile newcomers that are unwary. The Sea has no shore. There is no Light in the West. You have followed a fool-fire of the Elves to the end of the world! Which of you has seen the least of the Gods? Who has beheld the Dark King in the North? Those who seek the dominion of Middle-earth are the Eldar. Greedy for wealth they have delved in the earth for its secrets and have stirred to wrath the things that dwell beneath it, as they have ever done and ever shall. Let the Orcs have the realm that is theirs, and we will have ours. There is room in the world, if the Eldar will let us be!'
Elf	'You will now believe this at least: there is indeed a Dark Lord, and his spies and emissaries are among us; for he fears us, and the strength that we may give to his foes.'
Bereg	's end'
Haleth	'If you will remove and dwell further north, there you shall have the friendship and protection of the Eldar, and free lands of your own.'
Haleth	'My mind is now set, lord, to leave the shadow of the mountains, and go west, whither others of our kin have gone.'
Haleth	'Where are Haldad my father, and Haldar my brother? If the King of Doriath fears a friendship between Haleth and those who have devoured her kin, then the thoughts of the Eldar are strange to Men.'
Morgoth	's power overshadowed the Northlands; but Barahir would not flee from Dorthonion, and remained contesting the land foot by foot with his enemies. Then Morgoth pursued his people to the death, until few remained; and all the forest of the northward slopes of that land was turned little by little into a region of such dread and dark enchantment that even the Orcs would not enter it unless need drove them, and it was called Deldúwath, and Taur-nu-Fuin, The Forest under Nightshade. The trees that grew there after the burning were black and grim, and their roots were tangled, groping in the dark like claws; and those who strayed among them became lost and blind, and were strangled or pursued to madness by phantoms of terror. At last so desperate was the case of Barahir that Emeldir the Manhearted his wife (whose mind was rather to fight beside her son and her husband than to flee) gathered together all the women and children that were left, and gave arms to those that would bear them; and she led them into the mountains that lay behind, and so by perilous paths, until they came at last with loss and misery to Brethil. Some were there received among the Haladin, but some passed on over the mountains to Dor-lómin and the people of Galdor, Hador'
Edain	's folk were shut in Hithlum, and Bëor'
Gondolin	'By the way that you came you have leave to depart, if Thorondor is willing. I grieve at this parting; yet in a little while, as the Eldar account it, we may meet again.'
Maeglin	's end.'
Galdor	'Be content that we have returned; for only under an oath of silence was this permitted.'
Barahir	'I hear now that thou wouldst barter with me. What is thy price?'
Sauron	'That is a small price for so great a treachery. So shall it surely be. Say on!'
Gorlim	'and thou shalt go to Eilinel, and be set free of my service.'
Beren	'that come hither as a thief, and unbidden dare to approach my throne?'
Menegroth	'He is Beren son of Barahir, lord of Men, mighty foe of Morgoth, the tale of whose deeds is become a song even among the Elves.'
Beren	'What would you here, unhappy mortal, and for what cause have you left your own land to enter this, which is forbidden to such as you? Can you show reason why my power should not be laid on you in heavy punishment for you insolence and folly?'
Beren	'My fate, O King, led me hither, through perils such as few even of the Elves would dare. And here I have found what I sought not indeed, but finding I would possess for ever. For it is above all gold and silver, and beyond all jewels. Neither rock, nor steel, nor the fires of Morgoth, nor all the powers of the Elf-kingdoms, shall keep from me the treasure that I desire. For Lúthien your daughter is the fairest of all the Children of the World.'
Beren	'Death you have earned with these words; and death you should find suddenly, had I not sworn an oath in haste; of which I repent, baseborn mortal, who in the realm of Morgoth has learnt to creep in secret as his spies and thralls.'
Beren	'Death you can give me earned or unearned; but the names I will not take from you of baseborn, nor spy, nor thrall. By the ring of Felagund, that he gave to Barahir my father on the battle field of the North, my house has not earned such names from any Elf, be he king or no.'
Thingol	'shall Beren be slain; and far and free does his fate led him in the end, yet it is wound with yours. Take heed!'
Silmaril	's crown; and then, if she will, Lúthien may set her hand in yours. Then you shall have my jewel; and though the fate of Arda lie within the Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous.'
Beren	'do Elven-kings sell their daughters: for gems, and things made by craft. But if this be your will, Thingol, I will perform it. And when we meet again my hand shall hold a Silmaril from the Iron Crown; for you have not looked the last upon Beren son of Barahir.'
Beren	'I sell not to Elves or Men those whom I love and cherish above all treasure. And if there were hope or fear that Beren should come ever back alive to Menegroth, he should not have looked again upon the light of heaven, though I had sworn it.'
Beren	'I am Beren son of Barahir, friend of Felagund. Take me to the King!'
Beren	's son, am King, they have won a strong power in the realm, and lead many of their own people. They have shown friendship to me in every need, but I fear that they will show neither love nor mercy to you, if your quest be told. Yet my own oath holds; and thus we are all ensnared.'
Arda	's sons, if he take or find a Silmaril and keep it. For the Silmarils we alone claim, until the world ends.'
Nargothrond	'whatever betide.'
Beren	'I go now to my long rest in the timeless halls beyond the seas and the Mountains of Aman. It will be long ere I am seen among the Noldor again; and it may be that we shall not meet a second time in death or life, for the fates of our kindreds are apart. Farewell!'
Draugluin	'Huan is there!'
Morgoth	'There everlastingly thy naked self shall endure the torment of his scorn, pierced by his eyes, unless thou yield to me the mastery of thy tower.'
Beren	'You must choose, Beren, between these two: to relinquish the quest and your oath and seek a life of wandering upon the face of the earth; or to hold to your word and challenge the power of darkness upon its throne. But on either road I shall go with you, and our doom shall be alike.'
Beren	'I keep for the service of Lúthien, and it may be accounted happy to be free of such a master.'
Beren	'unto a swift and bitter death.'
Beren	's form to Angband; and her great fingered wings were barbed at each joint'
Thingol	'and I would that he had slain me in Menegroth, rather than I should bring you under the shadow of Morgoth.'
Beren	'From the shadow of death you can no longer save Lúthien, for by her love she is now subject to it. You can turn from your fate and lead her into exile, seeking peace in vain while your life lasts. But if you will not deny your doom, then either Lúthien, being forsaken, must assuredly die alone, or she must with you challenge the fate that lies before you--hopeless, yet not certain. Further counsel I cannot give, nor may I go further on your road. But my heart forebodes that what you find at the Gate I shall myself see. All else is dark to me; yet it may be that our three paths lead back to Doriath, and we may meet before the end.'
Draugluin	'O woe-begotten spirit, fall now into dark oblivion, and forget for a while the dreadful doom of life.'
Beren	'for here is afire that shall consume you, and all evil things.'
Menegroth	'I return according to my word. I am come now to claim my own.'
Thingol	'What of your quest, and of your vow?'
Beren	'It is fulfilled. Even now a Silmaril is in my hand.'
Thingol	'Show it to me!'
Beren	'and my doom full-wrought'
Gondolin	'Auta i lómë! The night is passing!'
Rivil	' And they hewed off Gelmir'
Gondolin	'Go now, lord, while time is! For in you lives the last hope of the Eldar, and while Gondolin stands Morgoth shall still know fear in his heart.'
Turgon	'Not long now can Gondolin be hidden; and being discovered it must fall.'
Huor	'Yet if it stands but a little while, then out of your house shall come the hope of Elves and Men. This I say to you, lord, with the eyes of death: though we part here for ever, and I shall not look on your white walls again, from you and from me a new star shall arise. Farewell!'
Gothmog	'Aurë entuluva! Day shall come again!'
Lindon	's people. The remnant of the Eldar of Hithlum were taken to the mines of the north and laboured there as thralls, save some that eluded him and escaped into the wilds and the mountains.'
Círdan	's walls, and the mariners passed up and down the coast and harried the enemy with swift landings. But in the next year, ere the winter was come, Morgoth sent great strength over Hithlum and Nevrast, and they came down the rivers Brithon and Nenning and ravaged all the Falas, and besieged the walls of Brithombar and Eglarest. Smiths and miners and makers of fire they brought with them, and they set up great engines; and valiantly though they were resisted they broke the walls at last. Then the Havens were laid in ruin, and the tower of Barad Nimras cast down; and the most part of Círdan'
Gondolin	'Sit now there; and look out upon the lands where evil and despair shall come upon those whom thou lovest. Thou hast dared to mock me, and to question the power of Melkor, Master of the fates of Arda. Therefore with my eyes thou shalt see, and with my ears thou shalt hear; and never shalt thou move from this place until all is fulfilled unto its bitter end.'
Menegroth	's son as my son, and so he shall remain, unless Húrin himself should return out of the shadows to claim his own. I would not have any say that Túrin was driven forth unjustly into the wild, and gladly would I welcome him back; for I loved him well.'
Beleg	'I will seek Túrin until I find him, and I will bring him back to Menegroth, if I can; for I love him also.'
Túrin	'they have made a road through the Pass of Anach.'
Beleg	'But you have seen the peaks of the Crissaegrim far off, and to the east the dark walls of the Gorgoroth. Anach lies between, above the high springs of Mindeb, a hard and dangerous road; yet many come by it now, and Dimbar which used to be in peace is falling under the Black Hand, and the Men of Brethil are troubled. We are needed there.'
Túrin	'Hard you are, Túrin, and stubborn. Now the turn is mine. If you wish indeed to have the Strongbow beside you, look for me in Dimbar; for thither I shall return.'
Túrin	'You have said, seek me in Dimbar. But I say, seek for me on Amon Rûdh! Else, this is our last farewell.'
Beleg	'and I will guard him and guide him as I may; then no man shall say that elven-words are lightly spoken. Nor would I wish to see so great a good run to nothing in the wild.'
Thingol	'Beleg Cúthalion! For many deeds you have earned my thanks; but not the least is the finding of my fosterson. At this parting ask for any gift, and I will not deny it to you.'
Beleg	'for the Orcs come now too thick and close for a bow only, and such blade as I have is no match for their armour.'
Thingol	'save only Aranrúth, my own.'
Thingol	'There is malice in this sword. The dark heart of the smith still dwells in it. It will not love the hand it serves; neither will it abide with you long.'
Cúthalion	'that shall be your help in the wild, and the help also of those whom you choose.'
Túrin	'Where is your house?'
Mîm	'High above the lands lies the house of Mîm, upon the great hill; Amon Rûdh is that hill called now, since the Elves changed all the names.'
Túrin	'You shall bring us to that place.'
Túrin	'There is blood on the hill-top.'
Túrin	'Enter into Bar-en-Danwedh, the House of Ransom; for so it shall be called.'
Túrin	'You can give no aid. For this is Khîm, my son; and he is dead, pierced by an arrow. He died at sunset. Ibun my son has told me.'
Túrin	'Alas! I would recall that shaft, if I could. Now Bar-en-Danwedh this house shall be called in truth; and if ever I come to any wealth, I will pay you a ransom of gold for your son, in token of sorrow, though it gladden your heart no more.'
Túrin	'You speak like a dwarf-lord of old; and at that I marvel. Now my heart is cooled, though it is not glad; and in this house you may dwell, if you will; for I will pay my ransom.'
Túrin	's thought again above his life in the wilderness as the leader of a petty company. But still Túrin would not return to Doriath; and Beleg yielding to his love against his wisdom remained with him, and did not depart, and in that time he laboured much for the good of Túrin'
Gorthol	'Assuredly Túrin son of Húrin shall not be slain.'
Elf	'The vengeance of the house of Hador will find you yet!'
Hithlum	' Then Beleg told him of his own errand in Taur-nu-Fuin; and Gwindor sought to dissuade him from his quest, saying that he would but join Túrin in the anguish that awaited him. But Beleg would not abandon Túrin, and despairing himself he aroused hope again in Gwindor'
Beleg	's face. Then Túrin stood stone-still and silent, staring on that dreadful death, knowing what he had done; and so terrible was his face, lit by the lightning that flickered all about them, that Gwindor cowered down upon the ground and dared not raise his eyes.'
Elf	's lake is endless laughter. She is fed from crystal fountains unfailing, and guarded from defilement by Ulmo, Lord of Waters, who wrought her beauty in ancient days.'
Laer Cú Beleg	'This is a strange blade, and unlike any that I have seen in Middle-earth. It mourns for Beleg even as you do. But be comforted; for I return to Nargothrond of the house of Finarfin, and you shall come with me, and be healed and renewed.'
Elf	'Yet once I was Gwindor son of Guilin, a lord of Nargothrond, until I went to the Nirnaeth Arnoediad, and was enslaved in Angband.'
Gwindor	'But rumour of him runs through Angband that he still defies Morgoth; and Morgoth has laid a curse upon turn and all his kin.'
Finduilas	'I am Agarwaen the son of Úmarth (which is the Bloodstained, son of Ill-fate), a hunter in the woods'
Gurthang	'The Mormegil cannot be slain, save by mischance, or an evil arrow from afar.'
Finduilas	'Daughter of the house of Finarfin, let no grief lie between us; for though Morgoth has laid my life in ruin, you still I love. Go whither love leads you; yet beware! It is not fitting that the Elder Children of Ilúvatar should wed with the Younger; nor is it wise, for they are brief, and soon pass, to leave us in widowhood while the world lasts. Neither will fate suffer it, unless it be once or twice only, for some high cause of doom that we do not perceive. But this Man is not Beren. A doom indeed lies on him, as seeing eyes may well read in him, but a dark doom. Enter not into it! And if you will, your love shall betray you to bitterness and death. For hearken to me! Though he be indeed agarwaen son of úmarth, his right name is Túrin son of Húrin, whom Morgoth holds in Angband, and whose kin he has cursed. Doubt not the power of Morgoth Bauglir! Is it not written in me?'
Finduilas	'Túrin son of Húrin loves me not; nor will.'
Finduilas	'In love I hold you for rescue and safe-keeping. But now you have done ill to me, friend, to betray my right name, and call my doom upon me, from which I would lie hid.'
Gwindor	'The doom lies in yourself, not in your name.'
Círdan	"'
Túrin	' Now if thou love me, leave me! Haste thee to Nargothrond, and save Finduilas. And this last I say to thee: she alone stands between thee and thy doom. If thou fail her, it shall not fail to find thee. Farewell!'
Túrin	'Hail, son of Húrin. Well met!'
Gurthang	'Evil have been all thy ways, son of Húrin. Thankless fosterling, outlaw, slayer of thy friend, thief of love, usurper of Nargothrond, captain foolhardy, and deserter of thy kin. As thralls thy mother and thy sister live in Dor-lómin, in misery and want. Thou art arrayed as a prince, but they go in rags; and for thee they yearn, but thou carest not for that. Glad may thy father be to learn that he hath such a son; as learn he shall.'
Túrin	'If thou wilt be slain, I will slay thee gladly. But small help will that be to Morwen and Nienor. No heed didst thou give to the cries of the Elf-woman. Wilt thou deny also the bond of thy blood?'
Túrin	'Nay! At least thou art valiant; beyond all whom I have met And they lie who say that we of our part do not honour the valour of foes. See now! I offer thee freedom. Go to thy kin, if thou canst. Get thee gone! And if Elf or Man be left to make tale of these days, then surely in scorn they will name thee, if thou spurnest this gift.'
Túrin	'Haste thee now, son of Húrin, to Dor-lómin! Or perhaps the Orcs shall come before thee, once again. And if thou tarry for Finduilas, then never shalt thou see Morwen again, and never at all shalt thou see Nienor thy sister; and they will curse thee.'
Túrin	'Then those deeds wrought not evil to all. And where else might I have better bestowed my kin, even had I come sooner? For if the Girdle of Melian be broken, then last hope is ended. Nay, it is better indeed as things be; for a shadow I cast wheresoever I come. Let Melian keep them! And I will leave them in peace unshadowed for a while.'
Gurthang	'Tell the Mormegil that Finduilas is here.'
Menegroth	's command she would not go back; and Mablung perforce brought them to the hidden ferries at the Meres of Twilight, and they passed over Sirion. And after three days'
Turambar	'Do not be troubled. The tale shall wait. But I will give you a name, and I will call you Níniel, Tear-maiden.'
Turambar	'Hail, Worm of Morgoth! Well met again! Die now and the darkness have thee! Thus is Túrin son of Húrin avenged.'
Turambar	'Come! It is time to go. If you will, I will lead you.'
Níniel	'The Black Sword was my beloved and my husband. To seek him only do I go. What else could you think?'
Turambar	'Hail, Nienor, daughter of Húrin. We meet again ere the end. I give thee joy that thou hast found thy brother at last. And now thou shalt know him: a stabber in the dark, treacherous to foes, faithless to friends, and a curse unto his kin, Túrin son of Húrin! But the worst of all his deeds thou shalt feel in thyself.'
Túrin	'Farewell, O twice beloved! A Túrin Turambar turun ambartanen: master of doom by doom mastered! O happy to be dead!'
Nen Girith	'Have you seen her? For Níniel is gone.'
Turambar	'Hear me to the end! Níniel the beloved is also dead. She cast herself into Teiglin, desiring life no more; for she learned that she was none other than Nienor daughter of Húrin of Dor-lómin, ere her forgetfulness came upon her, and that Turambar was her brother, Túrin son of Húrin. '
Níniel	'Nay, lord, he is crazed. For he came here saying that you were dead, and he called it good tidings. But you live.'
Túrin	'You come too late. The Dragon is dead.'
Túrin	'This only was wanting. Now comes the night.'
Túrin	'Hail Gurthang! No lord or loyalty dost thou know, save the hand that wieldeth thee. From no blood wilt thou shrink. Wilt thou therefore take Túrin Turambar, wilt thou slay me swiftly?'
Gurthang	'I also have been meshed in the doom of the Children of Húrin, and thus with my tidings have slain one that I loved.'
Turgon	'Does Morgoth sleep? You were mistaken.'
Thorondor	'If the Eagles of Manwë were wont to err thus, then long ago, lord, your hiding would have been in vain.'
Turgon	'for they can bear but one meaning. Even Húrin Thalion has surrendered to the will of Morgoth. My heart is shut.'
Serech	'Even so they hissed in Serech at the sunset,'
Morwen	'They are lost.'
Morwen	'Almost. I am spent I shall go with the sun. Now little time is left: if you know, tell me! How did she find him?'
Húrin	'She was not conquered,'
Glaurung	'Who are you, that would hinder me from entering the house of Finrod Felagund?'
Húrin	'for I am Húrin son of Galdor, returned out of Angband, and my son was Túrin Turambar, whom you have not forgotten; and he it was that slew Glaurung the Dragon, who wasted these halls where now you sit; and not unknown is it to me by whom the Dragon-helm of Dor-lómin was betrayed.'
Menegroth	's will nor by mine that he came never back to Doriath. And afterwards thy wife and thy daughter were harboured here with honour and goodwill; and we sought by all means that we might to dissuade Morwen from the road to Nargothrond. With the voice of Morgoth thou dost now upbraid thy friends.'
Menegroth	'Receive now, lord, the Necklace of the Dwarves, as a gift from one who has nothing, and as a memorial of Húrin of Dor-lómin. For now my fate is fulfilled, and the purpose of Morgoth achieved; but I am his thrall no longer.'
Silmaril	'How do ye of uncouth race dare to demand aught of me, Elu Thingol, Lord of Beleriand, whose life began by the waters of Cuiviénen years uncounted ere the fathers of the stunted people awoke?'
Fëanor	'; and the oath of the sons of Fëanor was waked again from sleep. For while Lúthien wore the Necklace of the Dwarves no Elf would dare to assail her; but now hearing of the renewal of Doriath and of Dior'
Nirnaeth Arnoediad	's heart; and at the last he rejected the bidding of Ulmo and refused his counsel. But in the warning of the Vala he heard again the words that were spoken before the departing Noldor on the coast of Araman long ago; and the fear of treason was wakened in Turgon'
Glorfindel	's ears. Then Thorondor bore up Glorfindel'
Glorfindel	's also. Therefore Idril and Tuor departed from Nan-tathren, and went southwards down the river to the sea; and they dwelt there by the mouths of Sirion, and joined their people to the company of Elwing Dior'
Teleri	'Here none but myself shall set foot, lest you fall under the wrath of the Valar. But that peril I will take on myself alone, for the sake of the Two Kindreds.'
Elwing	'Then would our paths be sundered for ever; but all thy perils I will take on myself also.'
Eärendil	'Await me here; for one only may bring the message that it is my fate to bear.'
Tuor	'Equally the Noldor, who went wilfully into exile, may not return hither.'
Manwë	'In this matter the power of doom is given to me. The peril that he ventured for love of the Two Kindreds shall not fall upon Eärendil, nor shall it fall upon Elwing his wife, who entered into peril for love of him; but they shall not walk again ever among Elves or Men in the Outer Lands. And this is my decree concerning them: to Eärendil and to Elwing, and to their sons, shall be given leave each to choose freely to which kindred their fates shall be joined, and under which kindred they shall be judged.'
Eärendil	'Choose thou, for now I am weary of the world.'
Maedhros	'Surely that is a Silmaril that shines now in the West?'
Maglor	'If it be truly the Silmaril which we saw cast into the sea that rises again by the power of the Valar, then let us be glad; for its glory is seen now by many, and is yet secure from all evil.'
Aman	'Who can tell to what dreadful doom we shall come, if we disobey the Powers in their own land, or purpose ever to bring war again into their holy realm?'
Maglor	'If Manwë and Varda themselves deny the fulfilment of an oath to which we named them in witness, is it not made void?'
Maedhros	'But how shall our voices reach to Ilúvatar beyond the Circles of the World? And by Ilúvatar we swore in our madness, and called the Everlasting Darkness upon us, if we kept not our word. Who shall release us?'
Maglor	'then indeed the Everlasting Darkness shall be our lot, whether we keep our oath or break it; but less evil shall we do in the breaking.'
Fëanor	'Since one is lost to us, and but two remain, and we two alone of our brothers, so is it plain that fate would have us share the heirlooms of our father.'
Elrond Half-elven	's son, child of Thingol and Melian; and Eärendil their father was the son of Idril Celebrindal, Turgon'
Númen	'Why should we not envy the Valar, or even the least of the Deathless? For of us is required a blind trust, and a hope without assurance, knowing not what lies before us in a little while. And yet we also love the Earth and would not lose it.'
Elros	' line even in its waning), but this brought no peace to the King. For Pharazôn son of Gimilkhâd had become a man yet more restless and eager for wealth and power than his father. He had fared often abroad, as a leader in the wars that the Númenóreans made then in the coastlands of Middle-earth, seeking to extend their dominion over Men; and thus he had won great renown as a captain both by land and by sea. Therefore when he came back to Númenor, hearing of his father'
Elf	'And out of it the world was made. For Darkness alone is worshipful, and the Lord thereof may yet make other worlds to be gifts to those that serve him, so that the increase of their power shall find no end.'
Pharazôn	'Who is the Lord of the Darkness?'
Sauron	'It is he whose name is not now spoken; for the Valar have deceived you concerning him, putting forward the name of Eru, a phantom devised in the folly of their hearts, seeking to enchain Men in servitude to themselves. For they are the oracle of this Eru, which speaks only what they will. But he that is their master shall yet prevail, and he will deliver you from this phantom; and his name is Melkor, Lord of All, Giver of Freedom, and he shall make you stronger than they.'
Elendil	'For you know well the charge that they make against us, that we are traitors and spies, and that until this day it has been false.'
Manwë	' said Amandil, I would betray the King. For there is but one loyalty from which no man can be absolved in heart for any cause. But it is for mercy upon Men and their deliverance from Sauron the Deceiver that I would plead, since some at least have remained faithful. And as for the Ban, I will suffer in myself the penalty, lest all my people should become guilty.'
Aman	'I will prepare my going in secret, and I will set sail into the east, whither daily the ships depart from our havens; and thereafter, as wind and chance may allow, I will go about, through south or north, back into the west, and seek what I may find. But for you and your folk, my son, I counsel that you should prepare yourselves other ships, and put aboard all such things as your hearts cannot bear to part with; and when the ships are ready, you should lie in the haven of Rómenna, and give out among men that you purpose, when you see your time, to follow me into the east. Amandil is no longer so dear to our kinsman upon the throne that he will grieve over much, if we seek to depart, for a season or for good. But let it not be seen that you intend to take many men, or he will be troubled, because of the war that he now plots, for which he will need all the force that he may gather. Seek out the Faithful that are known still to be true, and let them join you in secret, if they are willing to go with you, and share in your design.'
Aman	'Until I return I can say no more. But it is most like that you shall fly from the Land of the Star with no star to guide you; for that land is defiled. Then you shall lose all that you have loved, foretasting death in life, seeking a land of exile elsewhere. But east or west the Valar alone can say.'
Aman	'it may well prove that you will see me never again; and that I shall show you no such sign as Eärendil showed long ago. But hold you ever in readiness, for the end of the world that we have known is now at hand.'
Sauron	'Avallónë is vanished from the Earth and the Land of Aman is taken away, and in the world of this present darkness they cannot be found. Yet once they were, and therefore they still are, in true being and in the whole shape of the world as at first it was devised.'
Lindon	"Alas, for the weakness of the great! For a mighty king is Gil-galad, and wise in all lore is Master Elrond, and yet they will not aid me in my labours. Can it be that they do not desire to see other lands become as blissful as their own? But wherefore should Middle-earth remain for ever desolate and dark, whereas the Elves could make it as fair as Eressëa, nay even as Valinor? And since you have not returned thither, as you might, I perceive that you love this Middle-earth, as do I. Is it not then our task to labour together for its enrichment, and for the raising of all the Elven-kindreds that wander here untaught to the height of that power and knowledge which those have who are beyond the Sea?'
Sauron	's. And they became for ever invisible save to him that wore the Ruling Ring, and they entered into the realm of shadows. The Nazgûl were they, the Ringwraiths, the Enemy'
Círdan	's son, and had committed to him the realm of the south, he bore away the Ring, to be an heirloom of his house, and marched north from Gondor by the way that Elendil had come; and he forsook the South Kingdom, for he purposed to take up his father'
Mithrandir	'and help oft shall come from the hands of the weak when the Wise falter.'
Celeborn	'Seleborn'
Túna	'Tyoorin'
Menegroth	'the Lonely Isle'
Adan	'Elf-Man'
Gelion	'double stream'
Dorthonion	'Fell Fire'
Aglon	'The Narrow Pass'
Ainur	'order'
Akallabêth	'The Downfallen'
Al	'The Glorious'
Al	'Lord of Trees'
Al	'Lament for the Two Trees'
Al	'Haven of the Swans'
Aman	'Blessed, free from evil'
Aman	'Lover of Aman'
Amon Amarth	', the name given to Orodruin when its fires awoke again after Sauron'
Amon Ereb	'The Lonely Hill'
Amon Ethir	'The Hill of Spies'
Hill	', a lonely height in the lands south of Brethil; abode of Mîm, and lair of Túrin'
Arnor	'Weathertop'
Ana	'Westernesse'
Andram	'The Long Wall'
Anduin	'The Long River'
Anfauglir	'Jaws of Thirst'
Morgoth	'the Gasping Dust'
Angband	'Iron Prison, Hell of Iron'
Angrenost	'Iron Fortress'
Angrist	', the knife made by Telchar of Nogrod, taken from Curufin by Beren and used by him to cut the Silmaril from Morgoth'
Annatar	'Lord of Gifts'
Gelydh	'Gate of the Noldor'
Annúminas	'Tower of the West'
Aranrúth	', the name of Thingol'
Aratar	'The Exalted'
Arda	'The Realm'
Dorthonion	'the Green Region'
Aredhel	'Noble Elf'
Arnor	'Land of the King'
Pharazôn	'The Golden'
Bilbo	'Eärendil was a mariner that tarried in Arvernien…'
Ascar	'rushing, impetuous'
Astaldo	'The Valiant'
Atalantë	'The Downfallen'
Atanatári	'Fathers of Men'
Elf	'Men (in general)'
Avallónë	'for it is of all cities the nearest to Valinor'
Avari	'The Unwilling, the Refusers'
Avathar	'The Shadows'
Barad Eithel	'Tower of the Well'
Barad Nimras	'White Horn Tower'
Baran	'The Brown River'
Bar-en-Danwedh	'House of Ransom'
Morgoth	'the Constrainer'
Cúthalion	'Strongbow'
Beleg	'The Great Sea'
Beleg	'Great Fortress'
Beleriand	'the country of Balar'
Belthil	'Divine radiance'
Beren	's crown to be the bride-price of Lúthien Thingol'
Cabed Naeramarth	'Leap of Dreadful Doom'
Calacirya	'Cleft of Light'
Calaquendi	'Elves of the Light'
Calenardhon	'The Green Province'
Camlost	'Empty-handed'
Fëanor	'the harshest of the brothers and the most quick to anger'
Beren	'the Red Maw'
Celeborn	'Tree of Silver'
Celebrimbor	'Hand of Silver'
Celebrindal	'Silverfoof'
Hill	'stream flowing down from heights'
Círdan	'The Shipwright'
Cirith Ninniach	'Rainbow Cleft'
Cirith Thoronath	' Cleft'
Cuiviénen	'Water of Awakening'
Curunír	'The one of cunning devices'
Cúthalion	'Strongbow'
Dagnir	's Bane'
Dagor Aglareb	'The Glorious Battle'
Dagor Bragollach	'The Battle of Sudden Flame'
Dagor-nuin-Giliath	'The Battle-under-Stars'
Elf	'and was not accounted among the Moriquendi'
Dorthonion	'Horror of Night-shadow'
Brethil	'the Rainy Stair'
Eluchíl	'; son of Beren and Lúthien and father of Elwing, Elrond'
Caranthir	'Land of Caranthir'
Dor Daedeloth	'Land of the Shadow of Horror'
Dor Dínen	'The Silent Land'
Doriath	'Land of the Pence'
Dorthonion	'To the pine-trees upon the highland of Dorthonion I climbed in the Winter…'
Dúnedain	'The Edain of the West'
Beren	'Lover of the Sea'
Echoriath	'The Encircling Mountains'
Eglath	'The Forsaken People'
Eithel Ivrin	's Well'
Sirion	's Well'
Varda	'Star-Queen'
Elda	'The Elven-folk'
Eldamar	'Elvenhome'
Eldar	'People of the Stars'
Elf	'Star-lover'
Elendili	'Elf-friends'
Númen	'Starwards'
Elentári	', a name of Varda as maker of the Stars. She is called thus in Galadriel'
Elerrína	'Crowned with Stars'
Elrond Half-elven	'Star-dome'
Númen	'Star-foam'
Eluchíl	'Heir of Elu (Thingol)'
Dior	'Remembrance of Elu (Thingol)'
Elwë	'Greymantle'
Silmaril	'Star-spray'
Ephel Brandir	'The encircling fence of Brandir'
Ephel Dúath	'Fence of Shadow'
Gorgoroth	'The Mountains of Terror'
Lindon	'The Mountains of Lindon'
Ered Lómin	'The Echoing Mountains'
Ered Luin	'The Blue Mountains'
Ered Nimrais	'white horns'
Eregion	'Land of Holly'
Ereinion	'Scion of Kings'
Eru	'He that is Alone'
Esgalduin	'River under Veil'
Lórien	'Rest'
Bëor	'the Encampment'
Fëanor	'Spirit of Fire'
Fëanturi	'Masters of Spirits'
Finrod	'Lord of Caves'
Finrod	'the Friend of Men'
Fírimar	'Mortals'
Gil-galad	'Star of Radiance'
Glingal	'Hanging Flame'
Elf	'Golden-haired'
Gondolin	'The Hidden Rock'
Gondor	'Land of Stone'
Gonnhirrim	'Masters of Stone'
Gorthol	'Dread Helm'
Gurthang	', name of Beleg'
Gwaith-i-Mírdain	'People of the Jewel-smiths'
Hador	'Goldenhead'
Harad	'the South'
Haudh-en-Arwen	'The Ladybarrow'
Haudh-en-Ndengin	'The Mound of Slain'
Haudh-en-Nirnaeth	'The Mound of Tears'
Herunúmen	'Lord of the West'
Maedhros	'Ever-cold'
Hírilorn	'Tree of the Lady'
Hithaeglir	'Line of Misty Peaks'
Hithlum	'Land of Mist'
Nogrod	'hollow dwelling'
Beren	'great dog, hound'
Húrin	'the Strong'
Celebrindal	'Silverfoot'
Imladris	'), Elrond'
Lórien	'Master of Desire'
Yavanna	'animals, living things that move'
Kementári	'Queen of the Earth'
Khazâd	'excavations, halls, mansions'
Laer Cú Beleg	'The Song of the Great Bow'
Lammoth	', region north of the Firth of Drengist, named from the echoes of Morgoth'
Lanthir Lamath	'Star-spray'
Laurelin	'Song of Gold'
Silmarilli	'Release from Bondage'
Sindarin	'life-bread'
Linaewen	'Lake of birds'
Loeg Ningloron	'Pools of the golden water-flowers'
Quenya	'dusk-singers'
Lórien	'flower'
Lothlann	'The wide and empty'
Elf	'of the Heavy Hand'
Maeglin	', son of Eöl and Aredhel Turgon'
Teiglin	'Yellow River'
Malinalda	'Tree of Gold'
Mar-nu-Falmar	'The Land under the Waves'
Belegur	'Great Death'
Menegroth	'The Thousand Caves'
Menelmacar	'Swordsman of the Sky'
Beleg	'great fortress'
Minas Anor	'Tower of the Sun'
Minas Ithil	'Tower of the Moon'
Minas Morgul	'Tower of Sorcery'
Mindolluin	'Towering Blue-head'
Mindon	'Lofty Tower of the Eldalië'
Fëanor	'the Broideress'
Mithrandir	'The Grey Pilgrim'
Moriquendi	'Elves of the Darkness'
Mormegil	'The Black Sword'
Beren	'Elfsheen'
Aratar	'Ordainer, Judge'
Nandor	'Those who turn back'
Al	'Valley of Dreadful Death'
Nargothrond	'The great underground fortress on the river Narog'
Narn	'The Tale of the Children of Húrin'
Nauglamír	'The Necklace of the Dwarves'
Naugrim	'The Stunted People'
Túrin	'one who is deprived'
Nen Girith	'Shuddering Water'
Ered Lómin	'the Far Shore'
Nienor	'Mourning'
Bilbo	'He built a boat of timber felled in Nimbrethil to journey in …'
Númen	'White Blossom'
Níniel	'Tear-maiden'
Ninquelótë	'White Blossom'
Nirnaeth Arnoediad	'Tears Unnumbered'
Noldolantë	'The Fall of the Noldor'
Quenya Noldo	'the Wise'
Nómin	', the names that the Men of Bëor'
Númen	'Westland'
Nurtalë Valinóreva	'The Hiding of Valinor'
Oiolossë	'Ever-snow-white'
Mithrandir	'Olórin I was in my youth in the West that is forgotten'
Yavanna	'growing things with roots in the earth'
Orodruin	'Mount Doom'
Vana	'Sound of Horns'
Osgiliath	'Fortress of the Stars'
Gelion	'I wandered in Summer in the elm-woods of Ossiriand. Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by the Seven Rivers of Ossir!'
Ost-in-Edhil	'Fortress of the Eldar'
Pelóri	'The fencing or defensive heights'
Avari	'Those that speak with voices'
Silmarilli	'The History of the Silmarils.'
Ramdal	' (see Andram), where the dividing fall across Beleriand ceased'
Rána	'The Wanderer'
Rathlóriel	'Golden-bed'
Rohan	'The Horse-country'
Rohirrim	'The Horse-lords'
Númen	'Foam-flower'
Sarn Athrad	'Ford of Stones'
Saruman	'Man of Skill'
Sauron	'The Abhorred'
Serindë	'The Broideress'
Teleri	'Grey-cloak'
Grey	'Grey-mantle'
Sirion	'The Great River'
Arda	'the Breather'
Talath Rhunen	'The East Vale'
Taniquetil	'High White Peak'
Númen	'the Shipbuilder'
Númen	'He who looks afar'
Taur-im-Duinath	'The Forest between Rivers'
Dorthonion	'the Forest under Night'
Tauron	'Lord of Forests'
Thangorodrim	'Mountains of Tyranny'
Grey	'Grey-mantle'
Thorondor	'Old Thorondor, who built his eyries in the inaccessible peaks of the Encircling Mountains when Middle-earth was young'
Ingwë	'Woman of Secret Shadow'
Kindler	', a name of Varda as maker of the Stars. She is called thus in Galadriel'
Beren	'Daughter of Twilight'
Eressëa	'The Lonely Isle'
Tol Galen	'The Green Isle'
Tulkas	'greatest in strength and deeds of prowess'
Tumladen	'The Wide Valley'
Turambar	'Master of Doom'
Aratar	'The Rainer'
Aman	'Those of Aman'
Valinor	'the last child of Ungoliant to trouble the unhappy world'
Quenya	'fire-serpent'
Valacirca	'The Sickle of the Valar'
Val	'Account of the Valar'
Valar	'The Powers'
Valaraukar	'Demons of Might'
Val	'The Queens of the Valar'
Ingwë	'the Fair'
Varda	'The Lofty'
Vása	'The Consumer'
Quenya	', the name of Eärendil'
Mount Taras	'New Dwelling'
Voronwë	'The Steadfast'
Wilwarin	'butterfly'
Yavanna	'Giver of fruits'
Al	'shine'
Al	'rushing'
Túrin	'Master of Doom'
Andram	'long rune-rows'
Annúminas	'west'
Gurthang	'of iron'
Annatar	'Land of Gift'
Gelydh	'Gate-stream'
Sindarin	'(Tears) without reckoning'
Aradan	'Norbury of the Kings'
Maia	'sunlight'
Bar-en-Danwedh	'devoted to the house'
Tol Galen	'Green Ridges'
Sindarin	'Iron Jaws'
Carnil	'Red Maw'
Celebrindal	'foot'
Sindarin	'life-bread'
Dagnir	's Bane'
Deldúwath	'abhorrence'
Dorthonion	'middle lands'
Deldúwath	'nightingale'
Echoriath	'the great wall of the outer circle'
Glóredhel	'Half-elven'
Gondor	'(crested) wave'
Nargothrond	'the Hills of the Hunters'
Sindarin	'awe, dread'
Osgiliath	'host of stars'
Gonnhirrim	'Hidden Rock'
Menegroth	'dwarf'
Sindarin	'black arts'
Gwaith-i-Mírdain	'Middle-folk'
Deldúwath	'dark shapes'
Barahir	'lady'
Eru	'Children of Eru'
Sindarin	'mist'
Glamhoth	'din-horde'
Ilmarë	'mansion of the high airs'
Al	'bright'
Sindarin	'black glass'
Calacirya	' (cf. English cutter), and this meaning appears also in Círdan, Tar-Ciryatan, and no doubt in the name of Isildur'
Linaewen	'small bird'
Anfauglith	'Plain of Ashes'
Quenya	'snake, serpent'
Quenya	'snow, snow-white'
Malinalda	'golden circle'
Sindarin	'friend'
Annúminas	'first'
Fëanor	'Spirit of Fire'
Nogrod	'Petty-dwarves'
Eärnil	'disinterested love'
Hírilorn	'three'
Emyn Arnen	'wet'
Nimloth	'pallor'
Hírilorn	'Treebeard'
Quenya	'far and wide'
Ephel Dúath	'outer fence'
Silmarilli	'word'
Barad Nimras	'Last Peak'
Silmaril	'sparkle'
Angrist	'Orc-cleaver'
Rohirrim	' (cf. heru), Aragorn'
Oromë	'trumpet'
Sindarin	'east'
Elrond	'star-dome'
Sarn Gebir	'stakes'
Grey	'vale of dim streams'
Celebrindal	'end'
Annatar	'pillar'
Thangorodrim	'Throng-cleaver'
Thingol	'cloak'
Taniquetil	'Silvertine'
Sindarin	'starmoon'
Sindarin	'Flame of Udûn'
Urimë	's cry '
Yavannie	'autumn'
