Frodo	'I read the signs aright,'
Sam	'The horn of Boromir!'
Denethor	'Alas!'
Legolas	'Alas!'
Frodo	'The hobbits!'
Merry	'I do not know,'
Legolas	'First we must tend the fallen,'
Gimli	'But we must be swift,'
Legolas	'Then let us do first what we must do,'
Gimli	'The labour would be hard and long: there are no stones that we could use nearer than the water-side,'
Anduin	'Then let us lay him in a boat with his weapons, and the weapons of his vanquished foes,'
Legolas	'And I,'
Gimli	'S is for Sauron,'
Sauron	'Nay!'
Isengard	'Neither does he use his right name, nor permit it to be spelt or spoken,'
Boromir	'Well, we have no time to ponder riddles,'
Gimli	'Maybe there is no right choice,'
Legolas	'There is a strange tale to tell!'
Gimli	'We saw no signs of them,'
Gimli	'You left the East Wind to me,'
Boromir	'That is as it should be,'
Frodo	'The Orcs have been on this ground,'
Gimli	'How then do you read this riddle?'
Frodo	'Two packs are missing.'
Gimli	'But why should he leave us behind, and without a word?'
Frodo	'And a brave deed,'
Legolas	'Maybe hunting Orcs came on him and he fled,'
Frodo	'He fled, certainly,'
Frodo	'Well, so much at least is now clear,'
Frodo	'Our choice then,'
Frodo	'Let me think!'
Legolas	'No other folk make such a trampling,'
Gimli	'Well, after them!'
Isengard	'Which way would they turn, do you think?'
Rohan	'They will not make for the river, whatever mark they aim at'
Gimli	'Here is another riddle!'
Legolas	'Yet however you read it, it seems not unhopeful,'
Rohirrim	'No,'
Gimli	'What do you think?'
North	'I think that the enemy brought his own enemy with him,'
Gimli	'Or about the captives,'
North	'Look!'
Legolas	'Many things,'
Gimli	'I think, nonetheless, that we no longer need any trail to tell us which way to go,'
Pippin	'Yes,'
Legolas	'The brooch of an elven-cloak!'
Pippin	'Not idly do the leaves of Lórien fall,'
Gimli	'Then he at least was alive,'
Legolas	'Let us hope that he did not pay too dearly for his boldness,'
Legolas	'Unless our enemies rest also, they will leave us far behind, if we stay to sleep.'
Gimli	'But if we walk by night, we cannot follow their trail,'
Legolas	'The trail is straight, and turns neither right nor left, as far as my eyes can see,'
Gimli	'And there is this also,'
Isengard	'That is true,'
Gimli	'Yet it would be rash to be sure of their counsels,'
Legolas	'The Orcs will be doubly on their guard since then, and the prisoners even wearier,'
Gimli	'And yet even I, Dwarf of many journeys, and not the least hardy of my folk, cannot run all the way to Isengard without any pause '
Gimli	'You are our guide,'
Legolas	'My heart bids me go on,'
Moon	'We will not walk in the dark,'
Frodo	'And tonight he is shrouded anyway,'
Legolas	'But it is still dark,'
Legolas	'I fear they have passed beyond my sight from hill or plain, under moon or sun,'
Dawn	'Where sight fails the earth may bring us rumour,'
Legolas	'Let us go!'
Sauron	'Now do I most grudge a time of rest or any halt in our chase '
Moon	'To hope, maybe, but not to toil,'
Rohan	'Truly!'
Fangorn	'They rested here a while,'
Gimli	'I can see nothing away north or west but grass dwindling into mist,'
Entwash	'It is still far away,'
Gimli	'Well, let us go on,'
Gimli	'Nothing can we see to guide us here,'
Tom	'And ere morning it will be in the East,'
Gimli	'Three suns already have risen on our chase and brought no counsel '
Legolas	'Yes,'
Legolas	'Nay! The riders are little more than five leagues distant,'
Gimli	'Five leagues or one,'
Gimli	'Or spears,'
Legolas	'There are three empty saddles, but I see no hobbits,'
Sauron	'I have been among them,'
Gimli	'But Gandalf spoke of a rumour that they pay tribute to Mordor '
Legolas	'You will soon learn the truth,'
Gondor	'Who are you, and what are you doing in this land?'
North	'I am called Strider,'
Strider	'At first I thought that you yourselves were Orcs,'
Mirkwood	'No,'
Legolas	'Then there is a Lady in the Golden Wood, as old tales tell!'
Éomer	'As for that,'
Éomer	's eyes blazed, and the Men of Rohan murmured angrily, and closed in, advancing their spears. '
Legolas	'He stands not alone,'
Rohan	'Your pardon, Éomer!'
Éomer	'I will,'
Sauron	'First tell me whom you serve,'
Éomer	'I serve only the Lord of the Mark, Théoden King son of Thengel,'
Sauron	'I serve no man,'
Elendil	'Elendil!'
Denethor	'Tell me, lord,'
Sauron	'The doom of choice,'
Éomer	'That you need not pursue them further,'
Éomer	'There were no dwarves nor children,'
Gimli	'We do not speak of dwarves or children,'
Éomer	'Hobbits?'
Rohan	'A strange name for a strange folk,'
Éomer	'Halflings!'
Éomer	'Peace, Éothain!'
Mark	'All that you say is strange, Aragorn.'
Denethor	'I set out from Imladris, as it is named in the rhyme, many weeks ago,'
Gandalf Greyhame	'Gandalf!'
Shadowfax	'Indeed since his last coming in the summer all things have gone amiss. At that time our trouble with Saruman began. Until then we counted Saruman our friend, hut Gandalf came then and warned us that sudden war was preparing in Isengard. He said that he himself had been a prisoner in Orthanc and had hardly escaped, and he begged for help. But Théoden would not listen to him, and he went away. Speak not the name of Gandalf loudly in Théoden'
Gandalf	'Then Shadowfax has found his way alone from the far North,'
Éomer	'That is heavy tidings,'
Lórien	'It is tidings more grievous than any in this land can understand, though it may touch them sorely ere the year is much older,'
Éomer	'Your news is all of woe!'
Tol Brandir	'It is now the fourth day since he was slain,'
Éomer	'On foot?'
Elendil	's eyes. '
Entwash	'But now, lord, what would you have me do! I must return in haste to Théoden. I spoke warily before my men. It is true that we are not yet at open war with the Black Land, and there are some, close to the king'
Gimli	'Then you do not pay tribute to Sauron?'
Éomer	'We do not and we never have.'
Elendil	'Come now!'
Isengard	'Indeed in this riding north I went without the king'
Legolas	'Nonetheless we put an end to them. But we have been too long away. We are needed south and west. Will you not come? There are spare horses as you see. There is work for the Sword to do. Yes, and we could find a use for Gimli'
Éomer	'Hope does not remain,'
Éomer	'I would swear that no Orc escaped after we sighted them,'
Éomer	'I had forgotten that,'
Éomer	'True indeed,'
Théoden	'I do not think your law was made for such a chance,'
Théoden	'We both have need of haste,'
Mark	'It may be well enough for this lord of the race of Gondor, as he claims,'
Gimli	'No one,'
Éomer	'Hasufel is his name,'
Gamgee	'I need them not,'
Éomer	'Farewell, and may you find what you seek!'
Lady Galadriel	'And I will come, too,'
Éomer	'We shall see,'
Anduin	'There is little to discover,'
Tol Brandir	'We can do no more,'
Legolas	'But Gandalf was not,'
Gimli	'But Gandalf chose to come himself, and he was the first to be lost '
Legolas	'If those unhappy hobbits are astray in the woods, it might draw them hither,'
Fangorn	'And it might draw other things, neither Orc nor Hobbit,'
Gimli	'But the Rohirrim made a great burning here yesterday,'
Fangorn	'They were many,'
Legolas	'There is no need,'
Boromir	'Celeborn warned us not to go far into Fangorn,'
Celeborn	'I have heard many tales in Gondor and elsewhere,'
Fangorn	'You have journeyed further than I,'
Fangorn	'Yes, it is old,'
Fangorn	'And I do not wish to know,'
Fangorn	'Gimli!'
Gimli	'Feet!'
Legolas	'Only a few hours ago you were unwilling to sit on a horse of Rohan,'
Gimli	'It seems unlikely that I shall have the chance,'
Éomer	'If you wish to know what I think,'
Gimli	'I mark them,'
Merry	'I suppose I was knocked on the head,'
Strider	'I wish Gandalf had never persuaded Elrond to let us come,'
Pippin	'Rest while you can, little fool!'
Uglúk	'If I had my way, you'
Uglúk	'Then you can wish again,'
Lugbúrz	'Is Saruman the master or the Great Eye?'
Nazgûl	'I came across,'
Lugbúrz	'Maybe, maybe! Then you'
Uglúk	'Aye, we must stick together,'
Uglúk	'You have spoken more than enough, Uglúk,'
Pippin	's prostrate form with a curse. Yet that probably saved his life, for Uglúk'
Uglúk	'Put up your weapons!'
Pippin	'Now,'
Uglúk	'Pick up those prisoners!'
Pippin	's face was crushed against its neck; then it jolted off with him. Another treated Merry in the same way. The Orc'
Uglúk	'Well, what did you discover?'
Uglúk	'Now for the other!'
Uglúk	'Now then!'
Uglúk	'Now straight on!'
North	'But what are we going to do at sunrise?'
Uglúk	'Go on running,'
Uglúk	'You'
Uglúk	'Ai! Steady now!'
Uglúk	'Halt!'
Frodo	'No hope of escape!'
Uglúk	'Enough!'
Pippin	'But that'
Uglúk	'Very well,'
Uglúk	'Now we'
Uglúk	'I know,'
Grishnákh	'I'
Uglúk	'Indeed!'
Grishnákh	'I left a fool,'
Uglúk	'Splendid!'
Uglúk	'Nazgûl, Nazgûl,'
Uglúk	'You seem to know a lot,'
North	's, the Isengarders gradually passed through the Orcs of Mordor, and Grishnákh'
Isengard	'Maggots!'
Pippin	'They will make it yet. They will escape,'
Merry	'But how will they know that we are not Orcs?'
Uglúk	'Well, here we are,'
Uglúk	'Put those Halflings down!'
Merry	'I don'
Pippin	'Lembas!'
Merry	'Yes, I had a packet in my pocket,'
Pippin	'You won'
Uglúk	'They'
Uglúk	'I daresay you would,'
Mauhúr	'There'
Grishnákh	'Well, my little ones!'
Uglúk	's mind, as if caught direct from the urgent thought of his enemy: '
Grishnákh	'Find it?'
Merry	'Perhaps,'
Grishnákh	'Do I want it? Do I want it?'
Pippin	'We mean,'
Uglúk	'My dear tender little fools,'
Isengard	'I find it quite easy to believe,'
Pippin	'Gollum, gollum!'
Merry	'Untie our legs!'
Merry	'Now,'
Pippin	'No need to try,'
Grishnákh	'We must be off,'
Merry	'We must get under cover,'
Pippin	'Not here, the banks are too steep,'
Merry	'You seem to have been doing well, Master Took,'
Fangorn	'I shall have to brush up my toes, if I am to get level with you. Indeed Cousin Brandybuck is going in front now. This is where he comes in. I don'
Fangorn	'Lead on, Master Brandybuck!'
Merry	'I have not,'
Uglúk	'We have watched too long,'
Merry	'Let'
Entwash	'I suppose you haven'
Merry	'We could, if our legs would do it,'
Pippin	'Yes, it is all very dim, and stuffy, in here,'
Merry	'But the Sun at any rate must peep in sometimes.'
Pippin	'No, nor hobbits,'
Merry	'Low,'
Pippin	'Well, we'
Merry	'Hullo!'
Merry	'Up we go!'
Merry	'The wind'
Pippin	'Yes,'
Fangorn	'Hrum, now,'
Merry	'An Ent?'
Merry	'We always seem to have got left out of the old lists, and the old stories,'
Pippin	'Why not make a new line?'
Pippin	'Nobody else calls us hobbits; we call ourselves that,'
Merry	'We aren'
Pippin	'And I'
Merry	'Hm, but you are hasty folk, I see,'
Isengard	'But now,'
Merry	'There is quite a lot going on,'
Pippin	'Yes,'
Gandalf	'Then I can answer your other questions,'
Pippin	'Yes, we do,'
Hoom	'Hoo, come now!'
Merry	'Hill?'
Merry	'Where shall we go?'
Merry	'Well, you see, we have lost all our belongings,'
Celeborn	'Please, Treebeard,'
Laurelindórenan	'Hmm, did he now?'
Celeborn	'And so is this. Folk have come to grief here. Aye, they have, to grief. Laurelindórenan lindelorendor malinornélion ornemalin,'
Pippin	'What do you mean?'
Entish	'The trees and the Ents,'
Merry	'Like the Old Forest away to the north, do you mean?'
Aye	'We are tree-herds, we old Ents. Few enough of us are left now. Sheep get like shepherd, and shepherds like sheep, it is said; but slowly, and neither have long in the world. It is quicker and closer with trees and Ents, and they walk down the ages together. For Ents are more like Elves: less interested in themselves than Men are, and better at getting inside other things. And yet again Ents are more like Men, more changeable than Elves are, and quicker at taking the colour of the outside, you might say. Or better than both: for they are steadier and keep their minds on things longer. '
Wellinghall	'Hm! Here we are!'
Pippin	'Entwives?'
Caras Galadhon	'Hm, hoom!'
Merry	'And what about yourself?'
Isengard	'Who is Saruman?'
Isengard	'Some time ago I began to wonder how Orcs dared to pass through my woods so freely,'
Isengard	'I will stop it!'
Merry	'We will come with you,'
Uglúk	'Yes!'
Fladrif	'Fangorn, Finglas, Fladrif, aye, aye,'
Pippin	'Why are there so few when you have lived in this country so long?'
Pippin	'How very sad!'
Mirkwood	'They did not die!'
Merry	'Well, I am afraid the songs have not come west over the Mountains to the Shire,'
North	'It is rather a strange and sad story,'
Merry	'We usually lie down to sleep,'
Pippin	'Where is Entmoot?'
Entish	'unhasty'
Merry	'Hm, ha, hey, my Pippin!'
Pippin	'I wonder where Isengard is?'
Isengard	'I don'
Pippin	'What is Isengard like?'
Isengard	'So do I,'
Pippin	'Yes!'
Isengard	'Hm, hoom, here I am again,'
Quickbeam	'Ha, hmm, my friends, let us go for a walk!'
Bregalad	'There were rowan-trees in my home,'
Isengard	'Hoom, hom! Here we come with a boom, here we come at last!'
Pippin	'The Ents made up their minds rather quickly, after all, didn'
Sauron	'Quickly?'
Merry	'Will you really break the doors of Isengard?'
Fimbrethil	'Of course, it is likely enough, my friends,'
Gimli	'My very bones are chilled,'
Gimli	'And do not forget that old man!'
Legolas	'Why would that make you happy?'
Fangorn	'That would not baffle a Ranger,'
Legolas	'It is likely enough,'
Legolas	'No,'
Rohan	'So I thought,'
Lórien	'Here at last we find news!'
Gimli	'And here is the knife that cut them!'
Legolas	'Well, here is the strangest riddle that we have yet found!'
Legolas	'There was sorcery here right enough,'
Merry	'Maybe, I could,'
Gimli	'And how do you suppose that either of our friends came to have a hand free?'
Isengard	'I do not know how it happened,'
Gimli	'I do not know which daunts me more: Fangorn, or the thought of the long road through Rohan on foot,'
Fangorn	'Then we must go in, too,'
Legolas	'I do not think the wood feels evil, whatever tales may say,'
Gimli	'Well, it has no cause to be angry with me,'
Legolas	'That is just as well,'
Mirkwood	'I feel the air is stuffy,'
Gimli	'I dare say you could,'
Fangorn	'Then what shall we do now?'
Legolas	'Let us go up and look about us!'
Legolas	'We have journeyed a long way round,'
Gimli	'But we did not wish to come to Fangorn,'
Legolas	'Yet here we are-and nicely caught in the net,'
Gimli	'Look at what?'
Legolas	'Hush! Speak more softly! Look!'
Gimli	'I see, I see now!'
Gimli	'Why are you waiting? What is the matter with you?'
Legolas	'Now!'
An Elf	'Well met, I say again!'
Gimli	'Saruman!'
Mithrandir	'Mithrandir!'
Gandalf	'Gandalf!'
Gandalf	'Gandalf,'
Gimli	'Yes, you may still call me Gandalf,'
Gandalf	's head, and the Dwarf looked up and laughed suddenly. '
Gandalf	'Yes, I am white now,'
Gandalf	'No, I did not find them,'
Legolas	'The eagle!'
Gandalf	'Yes,'
Gimli	'Then you know about Frodo!'
Legolas	'Not alone,'
Gandalf	'Did he!'
Fangorn	'You have not said all that you know or guess, Aragorn my friend,'
Gandalf	'What? In riddles?'
Gandalf	'What then shall I say?'
Gimli	'Then is not Saruman a traitor?'
Isengard	'Indeed yes,'
Isengard	'It is a pity that our friends lie in between,'
Isengard	'The victor would emerge stronger than either, and free from doubt,'
Legolas	'The Winged Messenger!'
Isengard	'One that you cannot slay with arrows,'
Fangorn	'Now you speak to yourself again,'
Gandalf	'Wait a minute!'
Gandalf	'You certainly did not see me,'
Gimli	'Good, good!'
Glóin	'Yes, my good Dwarf,'
Legolas	'But the hobbits!'
Gandalf	'With Treebeard and the Ents,'
Rohan	'The Ents!'
Fangorn	'A legend of Rohan!'
Merry	'Ah! now you are asking much,'
Fangorn	'Perhaps he also thought that you were Saruman,'
Isengard	'Dangerous!'
Legolas	'What will they do?'
Gandalf	'I do not know,'
Black	'No,'
Théoden	'Come, Aragorn son of Arathorn!'
Legolas	'Then are we not to see the merry young hobbits again?'
Gandalf	'I did not say so,'
Gandalf	'We shall see, we shall see,'
Arathorn	'Yes, we will set out together,'
Gandalf	'Yes, together we will follow you,'
Gandalf	'I have stayed already too long,'
Gandalf	'Then tell us what you will, and time allows!'
Gandalf	'Name him not!'
Gimli	'Deep is the abyss that is spanned by Durin'
Gandalf	'Yet it has a bottom, beyond light and knowledge,'
Sauron	'We fought far under the living earth, where time is not counted. Ever he clutched me, and ever I hewed him, till at last he fled into dark tunnels. They were not made by Durin'
Gimli	'Long has that been lost,'
Gandalf	'It was made, and it had not been destroyed,'
Celebdil	'There upon Celebdil was a lonely window in the snow, and before it lay a narrow space, a dizzy eyrie above the mists of the world. The sun shone fiercely there, but all below was wrapped in cloud. Out he sprang, and even as I came behind, he burst into new flame. There was none to see, or perhaps in after ages songs would still be sung of the Battle of the Peak.'
Lothlórien	' '
Lady Galadriel	' '
Gimli	'Then she sent me no message?'
Legolas	'Dark are her words,'
Gimli	'That is no comfort,'
Legolas	'What then?'
Gandalf	'What is that?'
Glóin	' "
Gandalf	'In happy hour you have returned to us, Gandalf,'
Gandalf	'That will not be far to seek,'
Legolas	'They have not returned,'
Gandalf	'I shall not walk. Time presses,'
Gandalf	'Certainly,'
Hasufel	'There are three,'
Théoden	'Nor will you again,'
Shadowfax	'We go at once to Meduseld, the hall of your master, Théoden,'
Shadowfax	'Now I understand a part of last night'
Swift	'Yes, I knew,'
Shadowfax	'He is steering a straight course now for the halls of Théoden under the slopes of the White Mountains,'
Isengard	'There lies the Gap of Rohan,'
Legolas	'I see a great smoke,'
Gandalf	'Battle and war!'
Gandalf	'Look!'
Théoden	'Edoras those courts are called,'
Théoden	'Look!'
Legolas	'Five hundred times have the red leaves fallen in Mirkwood in my home since then,'
Legolas	'That, I guess, is the language of the Rohirrim,'
Gandalf	'Stay, strangers here unknown!'
Mundburg	'It is the will of Théoden King that none should enter his gates, save those who know our tongue and are our friends,'
Éomer	'We are no phantoms,'
Wormtongue	's eyes. '
Wormtongue	'Wormtongue?'
Théoden	'Well do you see and speak,'
Mark	'There are the doors before you,'
Háma	'I am the Doorward of Théoden,'
Lothlórien	'Keep these well,'
Andúril	'It is not my will,'
Háma	'It is the will of Théoden,'
Gondor	'It is not clear to me that the will of Théoden son of Thengel even though he be lord of the Mark, should prevail over the will of Aragorn son of Arathorn, Elendil'
Háma	'This is the house of Théoden, not of Aragorn, even were he King of Gondor in the seat of Denethor,'
Théoden	'This is idle talk,'
Andúril	'Truly,'
Háma	'Whatever its name may be,'
Gimli	'Not alone!'
Háma	'Come, come!'
Elendil	'Here I set it,'
Andúril	'Well,'
Gandalf	'Your staff,'
Théoden	'Foolishness!'
Háma	'The staff in the hand of a wizard may be more than a prop for age'
North	'Behold Eorl the Young!'
Éomer	'I greet you,'
Éomer	'You speak justly, lord,'
Gandalf	'You are held wise, my friend Wormtongue, and are doubtless a great support to your master,'
Wormtongue	'That is so,'
Grey	'The courtesy of your hall is somewhat lessened of late, Théoden son of Thengel,'
Wormtongue	'Then it is true, as Éomer reported, that you are in league with the Sorceress of the Golden Wood?'
Gandalf	'The wise speak only of what they know, Gríma son of Gálmód. A witless worm have you become. Therefore be silent, and keep your forked tongue behind your teeth. I have not passed through fire and death to bandy crooked words with a serving-man till the lightning falls.'
Wormtongue	's voice: '
Gandalf	'Now Théoden son of Thengel, will you hearken to me?'
Mark	'Open!'
Gandalf	'Send your guards down to the stairs foot,'
Gandalf	'Now, lord,'
Théoden	'It is not so dark here,'
Gandalf	'No,'
Gandalf	'Dark have been my dreams of late,'
Wormtongue	'Much,'
Théoden	'It is true,'
Gandalf	'A man may love you and yet not love Wormtongue or his counsels'
Théoden	'That may be. I will do as you ask. Call Háma to me. Since he proved untrusty as a doorward, let him become an errand-runner. The guilty shall bring the guilty to judgement,'
Wormtongue	'There is no time to tell all that you should hear,'
Gandalf	'Verily,'
Boromir	'Alas!'
Gandalf	'Your fingers would remember their old strength better, if they grasped a sword-hilt,'
Éomer	'Take this, dear lord!'
Éomer	'How comes this?'
Éomer	'It is my doing, lord,'
Éomer	'To lay at your feet, my lord,'
Gandalf	'Will you not take the sword?'
Éomer	'Westu Théoden hál!'
Háma	'Take back your sword, Éomer, sister-son!'
Éomer	'You have yourself already taken it,'
Théoden	'This counsel seems good to me now,'
Éomer	'Nay, lord,'
Éomer	'Now indeed there is hope of victory!'
Isengard	'Hope, yes,'
Mark	'Then even the defeat of Rohan will be glorious in song,'
Gandalf	'But your people must not be both unarmed and shepherdless'
Théoden	'I will take thought for that ere I go,'
Loth	'Here, lord, is Herugrim, your ancient blade,'
Wormtongue	'You lie,'
Théoden	'And he now requires it of you again,'
Wormtongue	'Assuredly not. lord,'
Théoden	'I will,'
Wormtongue	'Dear lord!'
Théoden	'If this is bewitchment,'
Wormtongue	'Mercy, lord!'
Théoden	'You have my pity,'
Gríma	'Such a resolve might be expected from a lord of the House of Eorl, old though he be,'
Gandalf	'Nay, Éomer, you do not fully understand the mind of Master Wormtongue,'
Gandalf	'That I knew already,'
Wormtongue	'Éowyn is safe now,'
Wormtongue	'You lie,'
Théoden	'That word comes too oft and easy from your lips,'
Théoden	'Do you hear this, Wormtongue?'
Théoden	'After him!'
Éomer	'And if any will bear him,'
Théoden	'Now my guests, come!'
Wormtongue	'How far back his treachery goes, who can guess?'
Wormtongue	'But when I escaped and warned you, then the mask was torn, for those who would see. After that Wormtongue played dangerously, always seeking to delay you, to prevent your full strength being gathered. He was crafty: dulling men'
Théoden	'I owe much to Éomer,'
Théoden	'Indeed my eyes were almost blind,'
Shadowfax	'Whether I came in time or not is yet to be seen,'
Théoden	'You choose well,'
Théoden	'May it keep you well!'
Théoden	'It may well be so,'
Rohan	'Hail Aragorn son of Arathorn!'
Éomer	'Behold! I go forth, and it seems like to be my last riding,'
Háma	'In the House of Eorl,'
Éowyn	'I said not Éomer,'
Éowyn	'It shall be so,'
Gandalf	'Well, at last we set off!'
Shadowfax	'A safer seat than many, I guess,'
Gimli	'And a Dwarf is no horseman. It is orc-necks I would hew, not shave the scalps of Men,'
Éomer	'I will forget my wrath for a while, Éomer son of Éomund,'
Legolas	'I thank you indeed,'
Éomer	'It shall he so,'
Gandalf	'Where is Shadowfax?'
Éomer	'Were the breath of the West Wind to take a body visible, even so would it appear,'
Gandalf Greyhame	'The gift seems already to be given,'
Gandalf	'I thank you, Théoden King,'
Isengard	'You have the keen eyes of your fair kindred, Legolas,'
Legolas	'Many miles lie between,'
Gandalf	'And behind us comes a very storm of Mordor,'
Isengard	'Is Éomer here?'
Théoden	'Where is Éomer? Tell him there is no hope ahead. He should return to Edoras before the wolves of Isengard come there.'
Théoden	'You thought I remained in Meduseld bent like an old tree under winter snow. So it was when you rode to war. But a west wind has shaken the boughs,'
Éomer	'Ride, Théoden!'
Háma	'What does that mean?'
Háma	'That Gandalf Greyhame has need of haste,'
Háma	'True enough,'
Horn	's Gate, before the mouth of the Deep, there was a heel of rock thrust outward by the northern cliff. There upon its spur stood high walls of ancient stone, and within them was a lofty tower. Men said that in the far-off days of the glory of Gondor the sea-kings had built here this fastness with the hands of giants. The Hornburg it was called, for a trumpet sounded upon the tower echoed in the Deep behind, as if armies long-forgotten were issuing to war from caves beneath the hills. A wall, too, the men of old had made from the Hornburg to the southern cliff, barring the entrance to the gorge. Beneath it by a wide culvert the Deeping-stream passed out. About the feet of the Hornrock it wound, and flowed then in a gully through the midst of a wide green gore, sloping gently down from Helm'
Erkenbrand	'We have found many of our folk lying slain as they fled thither,'
Théoden	'Has aught been seen of Gandalf?'
North	'It will go ill with Wormtongue, if Gandalf comes upon him said Théoden. '
Éomer	'Then let us be swift,'
Saruman	'Trust not to secret ways,'
Éomer	'It will not be long I fear,'
Théoden	'They bring fire,'
Éomer	'We need not fly much further,'
Théoden	'Nay, we are too few to defend the Dike,'
Éomer	'At the breach our rearguard must stand, if we are pressed,'
Éomer	'The Lord of the Mark rides to Helm'
Gamling	'Maybe, we have a thousand fit to fight on foot,'
Éomer	'I fear that he will not come now,'
Théoden	'I would that he had escaped,'
Gamling	'Behind us in the caves of the Deep are three parts of the folk of Westfold, old and young, children and women,'
Éomer	'That is well,'
Gamling	'If they come to bargain for our goods at Helm'
Mirkwood	'I do not doubt it,'
Gimli	'It is dark for archery,'
Éomer	'Gúthwinë!'
Andúril	'Andúril!'
Éomer	'Yet we cannot stay here beyond the walls to defend them,'
Gimli	'I followed you to shake off sleep,'
Éomer	'I shall not find it easy to repay you,'
Gimli	'Two!'
Legolas	'Two?'
Legolas	'Ai-oi!'
Helm	'The Orcs are in the Deep!'
Legolas	'Twenty-one!'
Gamling	'We must stop this rat-hole,'
Gimli	'We do not shape stone with battle-axes, nor with our finger-nails,'
Gamling	'It will be drier above,'
Gimli	'Twenty-one!'
Legolas	'Good!'
Gamling	'Dawn is not far off,'
Gamling	'But these creatures of Isengard, these half-orcs and goblin-men that the foul craft of Saruman has bred, they will not quail at the sun,'
Éomer	'I hear them,'
Théoden	'Yet there are many that cry in the Dunland tongue,'
Horn	'Nonetheless day will bring hope to me,'
Éomer	'So the minstrels say,'
Elendil	'Devilry of Saruman!'
Legolas	'Ill enough,'
Legolas	'Alas! That is evil news,'
Legolas	'That must be my hope'
Legolas	'I must go and seek some arrows,'
Gamling	'Nay, he did not come to the Rock,'
Théoden	'I fret in this prison,'
Horn	'Here at least you are guarded in the strongest fastness of the Mark,'
Isengard	'It is said that the Hornburg has never fallen to assault,'
Arathorn	'The end will not be long,'
North	'I have still this to say,'
Théoden	'Helm! Helm!'
Isengard	'Forth Eorlingas!'
Erkenbrand	'Erkenbrand!'
Gandalf	'Behold the White Rider!'
Legolas	'Mithrandir, Mithrandir!'
Legolas	'You have passed my score by one,'
Théoden	'Welcome, Éomer, sister-son!'
Éomer	'Hail, Lord of the Mark!'
Gandalf	'Unlooked-for?'
Théoden	'Then if not yours, whose is the wizardry?'
Gandalf	'It is not wizardry, but a power far older,'
Théoden	'And what may be the answer to your riddle?'
Gandalf	'If you would learn that, you should come with me to Isengard '
Isengard	'Yes,'
Théoden	'But there are not men enough in the Mark, not if they were all gathered together and healed of wounds and weariness, to assault the stronghold of Saruman,'
Gandalf	'Nevertheless to Isengard I go,'
Théoden	'Nay!'
Gandalf	'I wish to speak with Saruman, as soon as may be now,'
Wormtongue	'My men are weary with battle,'
Théoden	'Then let all who are to ride with me rest now,'
Erkenbrand	'Help now to repair the evil in which you have joined,'
Gandalf	'Let the Orcs lie,'
Saruman	's company prepared to depart. The work of burial was then but beginning; and Théoden mourned for the loss of Háma, his captain, and cast the first earth upon his grave. '
Gandalf	'It is hot in here,'
Gandalf	'Yes,'
Legolas	'What has become of the miserable Orcs?'
Gandalf	'That, I think, no one will ever know,'
Gimli	'No, no!'
Fangorn	'Not of all that go on two legs,'
North	'Then that is the most perilous wood in Middle-earth,'
Legolas	'And I would give gold to be excused,'
Mirkwood	'You have not seen, so I forgive your jest,'
Helm	'And, Legolas, when the torches are kindled and men walk on the sandy floors under the echoing domes, ah! then, Legolas, gems and crystals and veins of precious ore glint in the polished walls; and the light glows through folded marbles, shell-like, translucent as the living hands of Queen Galadriel. There are columns of white and saffron and dawn-rose, Legolas, fluted and twisted into dreamlike forms; they spring up from many-coloured floors to meet the glistening pendants of the roof: wings, ropes, curtains fine as frozen clouds; spears, banners, pinnacles of suspended palaces! Still lakes mirror them: a glimmering world looks up from dark pools covered with clear glass; cities. such as the mind of Durin could scarce have imagined in his sleep, stretch on through avenues and pillared courts, on into the dark recesses where no light can come. And plink! a silver drop falls, and the round wrinkles in the glass make all the towers bend and waver like weeds and corals in a grotto of the sea. Then evening comes: they fade and twinkle out; the torches pass on into another chamber and another dream. There is chamber after chamber, Legolas; hall opening out of hall, dome after dome, stair beyond stair; and still the winding paths lead on into the mountains'
Legolas	'No, you do not understand,'
Fangorn	'You move me, Gimli,'
Fangorn	'That would not be the way of return that I should choose,'
Isengard	'You have my promise,'
Isengard	'About fifteen leagues, as the crows of Saruman make it.'
Gimli	'And when we come there, what shall we see?'
Aglarond	'I do not know myself for certain,'
Legolas Greenleaf	'No, no!'
Gandalf	'You need no weapons,'
Théoden	'Herdsmen!'
Fangorn	'They are the shepherds of the trees,'
Gandalf	'You should be glad, Théoden King,'
Théoden	'Yet also I should be sad,'
Sauron	'It may,'
Éomer	'The carrion-fowl have been busy about the battle-field,'
Éomer	'This is become a dreary place,'
Théoden	'Alas!'
Gandalf	'This is our way,'
Gandalf	'Look!'
Gandalf	'Here lie all the Men of the Mark that fell near this place,'
Éomer	'Here let them rest!'
Théoden	'Is this your work also, Gandalf, my friend?'
Elfhelm	'With the help of Shadowfax - and others,'
Théoden	'And glad shall I be to see it again,'
Éomer	'There is ever a fume above that valley in these days,'
Tom	'Maybe he is,'
Gandalf	'Stay where you are!'
Isengard	's arm within the Wizard'
Wormtongue	'Welcome, my lords, to Isengard!'
Gandalf	'Doubtless he would!'
Isengard	'No, good sir, the matter escaped him,'
Gimli	'And what about your companions? What about Legolas and me?'
Legolas	'You speak for me, Gimli,'
Pippin	'One thing you have not found in your hunting, and that'
Gimli	'Well-earned?'
Théoden	'It cannot be doubted that we witness the meeting of dear friends,'
Pippin	'Hobbits, if you please, lord,'
Théoden	'Hobbits?'
Théoden	'My people came out of the North long ago,'
Merry	'It could indeed, lord,'
Théoden	'For one thing,'
Merry	'That is not surprising,'
Merry	'You do not know your danger, Théoden,'
Merry	'Away on the north side, I believe. He went to get a drink-of clean water. Most of the other Ents are with him, still busy at their work - over there.'
Gandalf	'And is Orthanc then left unguarded?'
Merry	'There is the water,'
Legolas	'Yes, a tall grey Ent is there,'
Gandalf	'It is past noon,'
Merry	'He left a message,'
Fangorn	'That is better!'
Théoden	'I will come with you,'
Pippin	'So that is the King of Rohan!'
Legolas	'And now that the great ones have gone to discuss high matters,'
Merry	'And there is a great deal, too, that we want to know about you '
Legolas	'All in good time,'
Gimli	'Or second,'
Pippin	'Then you shall have it,'
Gimli	'Less than an eye!'
Isengard	'We wouldn'
Gimli	'And pipe-weed?'
Merry	'No, I don'
Pippin	'I lit a bit of fire,'
Pippin	'Store-room in there, and above the woods, luckily,'
Merry	'And you need not turn up your nose at the provender, Master Gimli,'
Gimli	'Indeed yes,'
Legolas	'You are full of courtesy this morning,'
Pippin	'Maybe; and why not?'
Gimli	'Aye, you do indeed,'
Merry	'He has not,'
Fangorn	'You have drunk of the waters of the Ents, have you?'
Pippin	'Ents,'
Gimli	'Now, now!'
Bree	'You shall have it, if there is time,'
Pippin	'We have heaps of it,'
Merry	'It is good!'
Gimli	'It would,'
Merry	'No, I am afraid not,'
Pippin	'Half a moment!'
Legolas	'Well, I am going back into the open air, to see what the wind and sky are doing!'
Gandalf	'Now let us take our ease here for a little!'
Strider	'Look!'
Strider	'He has never been away,'
Pippin	'Well, my tale begins with waking up in the dark and finding myself all strung-up in an orc-camp,'
Merry	'The fifth of March in the Shire-reckoning,'
Uglúk	'Well!'
Pippin	'I know,'
Gimli	'The cutting of the bands on your wrists, that was smart work!'
Legolas	'And set us a pretty riddle,'
Merry	'Unfortunately not,'
Isengard	'All this about the Orcs of Barad-dûr, Lugbúrz as they call it, makes me uneasy,'
Merry	'Yes, whichever side wins, his outlook is poor,'
Gimli	'We caught a glimpse of the old villain, or so Gandalf hints,'
Pippin	'When was that?'
Merry	'Let me see,'
Pippin	'If Saruman had heard it, he would be a hundred miles away by now, even if he had had to run on his own legs,'
Merry	'We came down over the last ridge into Nan Curunír, after night had fallen,'
Isengard	'Well, in the early night we crept down a long ravine into the upper end of the Wizard'
Isengard	'Then all at once there was a tremendous stir. Trumpets blared and the walls of Isengard echoed. We thought that we had been discovered, and that battle was going to begin. But nothing of the sort. All Saruman'
Black	'I thought of him too,'
Isengard	'Well, of all sorts together, there must have been ten thousand at the very least,'
Isengard	'They pushed, pulled, tore, shook, and hammered; and clang-bang, crash-crack, in five minutes they had these huge gates just lying in ruin; and some were already beginning to eat into the walls, like rabbits in a sand-pit. I don'
Elrond	'No,'
Isengard	'The Ents are safe,'
Quickbeam	'When the Ents had reduced a large part of the southern walls to rubbish, and what was left of his people had bolted and deserted him, Saruman fled in a panic. He seems to have been at the gates when we arrived: I expect he came to watch his splendid army march out. When the Ents broke their way in, he left in a hurry. They did not spot him at first. But the night had opened out, and there was a great light of stars, quite enough for Ents to see by, and suddenly Quickbeam gave a cry "
Entwash	' "
Pippin	'There was no need. He halted just by us and looked down at us. '
Gandalf	'Treebeard heard his voice and came out of the shadows at once; and there was a strange meeting. I was surprised, because neither of them seemed surprised at all. Gandalf obviously expected to find Treebeard here; and Treebeard might almost have been loitering about near the gates on purpose to meet him. Yet we had told the old Ent all about Moria. But then I remembered a queer look he gave us at the time. I can only suppose that he had seen Gandalf or had some news of him, but would not say anything in a hurry. "
Hoom	'"
Gandalf	'"
Gandalf	'"
Gandalf	'"
Huorns	'"
Saruman	'We saw a cloud of smoke and steam from the south last night when we came to the mouth of Nan Curunír,'
Isengard	'Not he!'
Gandalf	'Since then the water has been sinking again. There must be outlets somewhere from the caves underneath, I think. If Saruman peeps out of any of his windows, it must look an untidy, dreary mess. We felt very lonely. Not even a visible Ent to talk to in all the ruin; and no news. We spent the night up on top there above the arch, and it was cold and damp and we did not sleep. We had a feeling that anything might happen at any minute. Saruman is still in his tower. There was a noise in the night like a wind coming up the valley. I think the Ents and Huorns that had been away came back then; but where they have all gone to now, I don'
Wormtongue	'There is one thing I wonder about,'
Pippin	'Oh yes, I forgot about him,'
Isengard	'"
Wormtongue	'I caught the sidelong looks he gave to Treebeard, and I said to myself "
Wormtongue	'"
Gandalf	'"
Wormtongue	'"
Wormtongue	'"
Rohan	'He was,'
Merry	'Yes, I don'
Horn	'"
Gimli	'We understand it all perfectly now,'
Wormtongue	'All except one thing,'
Pippin	'Yes,'
Gandalf	'Ah well, whatever evil was afoot is over now, I hope; or else it is beyond our reach at present,'
Isengard	'I wonder what he is doing,'
Legolas	'There is Gandalf, and Théoden and his men!'
Merry	'Walk warily!'
Merry	'We have,'
Gandalf	'Do you indeed?'
Gimli	'I will come,'
Gandalf	'And how will you learn that, Master Dwarf?'
Pippin	'What'
Gandalf	'The last is most likely, if you ride to his door with a light heart,'
Gandalf	'I will go up,'
Éomer	'And I too will go up,'
Gandalf	'As you will,'
Legolas	'Nay!'
Théoden	'Come then!'
Pippin	'Half a sticky mile from here to the gate!'
Saruman	'Saruman, Saruman!'
Gandalf	'Go and fetch Saruman, since you have become his footman, Gríma Wormtongue!'
Gimli	'Like, and yet unlike,'
Théoden	'But come now,'
Rohan	'Peace!'
Háma	'Lord, hear me!'
Éomer	'If we speak of poisoned tongues what shall we say of yours, young serpent?'
Théoden	'We will have peace,'
Saruman	's their master'
Théoden Horsemaster	'Gibbets and crows!'
Isengard	'Saruman, Saruman!'
Gandalf	'Will I come down?'
Gandalf	'The treacherous are ever distrustful,'
Grey	'That sounds well,'
Gandalf	'Reasons for leaving you can see from your windows.'
Gandalf	'Come back, Saruman!'
Grey	'I did not give you leave to go,'
Pippin	'Saruman, your staff is broken.'
Wormtongue	'The murderous rogue!'
Wormtongue	'That may be so,'
Pippin	'Here, my lad, I'
Gimli	'But he may have other things to cast,'
Gandalf	'It is the end,'
Gandalf	'Well, that is done,'
Merry	'He will have guessed, surely?'
Isengard	'Not likely,'
Pippin	'And what if Sauron does not conquer? What will you do to him?'
Wormtongue	'I? Nothing!'
Gandalf	'It seems that Saruman thinks so too,'
Gandalf	'Here are three of my companions, Treebeard,'
Fangorn	'And still is,'
Fangorn	'I will come, if I have the fortune,'
Glóin	'The friend I speak of is not an Elf,'
Fangorn	'Hoom, hm! Ah now,'
Gandalf	'Hoo! Come now!'
Gandalf	'Yes, we must go, and go now,'
Moon	'Maybe I shall,'
Merry	'We will!'
Gandalf	'No,'
Saruman	'Indeed no! Ents will see to that,'
Isengard	'Good!'
Gandalf	'The Ents pay attention to every detail!'
Merry	'Are we riding far tonight, Gandalf?'
Meriadoc	'So you heard that?'
Merry	'Thank you!'
Helm	'When we came, we meant to go straight from Isengard back to the king'
Merry	'Nothing or a double helping is your way!'
Strider	'All right, I'
Merry	'What'
Pippin	'No,'
Lórien	'Work it out on your fingers!'
Pippin	'Oh, that!'
Merry	'Well, Rivendell then,'
Pippin	'You had the luck, Merry,'
Merry	'Oh yes, he is!'
Pippin	'Well, if Gandalf has changed at all, then he'
Merry	'Hullo!'
Pippin	'But our whole life for months has been one long meddling in the affairs of Wizards,'
Merry	'Go to sleep!'
Gandalf	'All right! What'
Merry	'Well, what else could I say?'
Pippin	'You idiotic fool!'
Pippin	'So this is the thief!'
Gandalf	'It is not for you, Saruman!'
Gandalf	's hand. '
Pippin	'I, I took the ball and looked at it,'
Gandalf	'That won'
Saruman	'Then suddenly he seemed to see me, and he laughed at me. It was cruel. It was like being stabbed with knives. I struggled. But he said: "
Gandalf	'Look at me!'
Thing	'All right!'
Gandalf	'I think all will be well now,'
Elendil	'Dangerous indeed, but not to all,'
Isengard	'Never yet. Do not then stumble at the end of the road,'
Isengard	'Yes, there can be no doubt,'
Stone	'That many times is seen,'
Isengard	'Not yet,'
Gandalf	'As you will,'
Nazgûl	'Nazgûl!'
Shadowfax	'You shall come with me this time,'
Shadowfax	'Farewell! Follow fast!'
Merry	'A beautiful, restful night!'
Pippin	'If you had been the first to lift the Orthanc-stone, and not he, how would it be now?'
Shadowfax	'I do not ride elf-fashion, except on Shadowfax,'
Pippin	'How fast is he going?'
Gandalf	'He is running now as fast as the swiftest horse could gallop,'
Pippin	'What are you saying, Gandalf?'
Pippin	'No, not all,'
Gandalf	'About the palantíri of the Kings of Old,'
Pippin	'Then it was not made, not made'
Sauron	'No,'
Pippin	'What did the Men of old use them for?'
Elendil	'To see far off, and to converse in thought with one another,'
Pippin	'I wish I had known all this before,'
Gandalf	'Oh yes, you had,'
Pippin	'It does,'
Gandalf	'Good!'
Pippin	'But I should like to know-'
Gandalf	'Mercy!'
Isengard	'The names of all the stars, and of all living things, and the whole history of Middle-earth and Over-heaven and of the Sundering Seas '
Gandalf	'It was a Black Rider on wings, a Nazgûl,'
Pippin	'But it was not coming for me, was it?'
Isengard	'Of course not,'
Gandalf	'See now!'
Pippin	'I thought you were going to stop at Helm'
Théoden	'Leagues upon leagues,'
Frodo	'Well, master, we'
Sam	`What a fix! '
Frodo	'Yes, I can smell it,'
Sam	'Or another and another and another,'
Frodo	'I wonder,'
Frodo	'Only those, what d'
Sam	`Did you see them again, Mr. Frodo?'
Frodo	'No,'
Sam	`Nor me,'
Frodo	'I hope you'
Sam	'I hope that'
Frodo	'So do I,'
Frodo	`There'
Sam	'A nasty drop, I'
Frodo	`It would be a big jump still,'
Sam	'And that'
Frodo	`All the same,'
Sam	`Very good! '
Frodo	'You? '
Frodo	'No, no! Sam, you old ass! '
Sam	`I don'
Frodo	'Climb back, I suppose,'
Sam	'Easy said,'
Frodo	`No! Not if I can help it,'
Sam	`Come back! Come back! '
Frodo	`What can I do, Mr. Frodo? What can I do? '
Sam	'I'
Frodo	`No, no! wait! '
Gamgee	`Rope!'
Frodo	`Stop chattering!'
Frodo	`I should have been half drowned down there, or washed clean off,'
Sam	`Better luck if I'
Frodo	`A pity I didn'
Frodo	'Who'
Sam	`Ah! Who would? '
Frodo	`Thirty ells! '
Frodo	`The rain'
Frodo	'And I'
Frodo	`It'
Frodo	`It does look sort of silver in the dark,'
Sam	'Very well,'
Frodo	's hands, when Sam came to the bottom and called up: `
Frodo	`If you can think of any way we could have both used the rope and yet brought it down with us, then you can pass on to me ninnyhammer, or any other name your Gaffer gave you,'
Galadriel	`No, I can'
Shire	`I may not be much good at climbing, Mr. Frodo,'
Frodo	`Then the rope must have broken - frayed on the rock-edge, I expect,'
Sam	`I bet it didn'
Frodo	'Then I'
Frodo	'It certainly came,'
Sam	'They do cheer the heart, don'
Frodo	'Yes,'
Sam	'We had better try a way back southwards along the line of the cliff, I think,'
Frodo	'I suppose so,'
Frodo	'Well! '
Sam	`Do you think he can see us? '
Frodo	`I don'
Sam	`Then why is he coming down just here? '
Frodo	'Quietly, Sam! '
Sam	`Well, I'
Frodo	`Careful!'
Sam	`It doesn'
Frodo	`Hsh! '
Sam	`Well, what'
Frodo	`No,'
Sam	`Oh hasn'
Frodo	'I daresay,'
Frodo	'No, we won'
Sméagol	's eyes which flinched and twisted away. `
Frodo	`So you have been there? '
Frodo	`He will not go away or go to sleep at your command, Sméagol,'
Sméagol	'He'
Frodo	`Perhaps we'
Frodo	'Get up! '
Frodo	`Now! '
Frodo	`Then sit down,'
Frodo	`All we need is something to keep a hold on him,'
Frodo	`No, I will not take it off you,'
Frodo	`Swear? '
Frodo	'Sméagol,'
Frodo	`And what would you swear? '
Frodo	`To be very very good,'
Frodo	'No! not on it,'
Frodo	'Down! down! '
Sméagol	`We promises, yes I promise!'
Frodo	'Take the rope off, Sam!'
Moon	'Well, Gollum, or whatever it is we'
North	'Yes, yes,'
Sam	'Wait a bit, Gollum!'
Sméagol	'No, no! '
Baggins	'Ha! ha! What does we wish?'
Gamgee	's mind a problem that had been troubling him from the moment when he understood that hir master was going to adopt Gollum as a guide: the problem of food. It did not occur to him that his master might also have thought of it. hut he supposed Gollum had. Indeed how had Gollum kept himself in all his lonely wandering? '
Sméagol	`Day is near,'
Frodo	`We should be glad to see the Sun;'
Sméagol	`You are not wise to be glad of the Yellow Face,'
Frodo	`We must take a little food,'
Frodo	`No, we have got no fish,'
Sméagol	`Ach! No! '
Frodo	`I'
Frodo	'Look here! '
Frodo	'Perhaps you'
Sam	'Here, what are you doing? '
Sam	'Come back now!'
Sam	'I dunno,'
Frodo	`Don'
Sam	`About the food,'
Frodo	`I don'
Sam	'Worms or beetles or something slimy out of holes,'
Sméagol	'Better now,'
Frodo	'How do we shape our course now, Sméagol? '
Sméagol	`No need, no need at all,'
Sam	'Not a bird! '
Sam	`No, no birds,'
Sam	`Come, Mr. Frodo! '
Frodo	`All right,'
Frodo	`Who are they? What are they? '
Frodo	'I don'
Sméagol	`Yes, yes,'
Sam	'But that is an age and more ago,'
Sméagol	`Yes, yes,'
Sam	'Three precious little Gollums in a row we shall be, if this goes on much longer,'
Sam	'What is it? '
Sméagol	'Yes, yes, and Sam stinks! '
Tol Brandir	`Wraiths!'
Frodo	`I feel sick,'
Sméagol	`I don'
Sméagol	`But the Precious holds the promise,'
Baggins	`Oh no, not if it doesn'
Sméagol	'But there'
Sméagol	`No, no! Not that way! '
Sméagol	'Nice hobbits! Nice Sam! '
Sam	`High time! '
Sméagol	'To the Gate, eh?'
Sam	'Go on with you! '
Sam	`Well, here we are! '
Sméagol	`No, no! '
Sam	'Then what the plague did you bring us here for? '
Frodo	'I did,'
Sméagol	`No, no, master! '
Frodo	'I am commanded to go to the land of Mordor, and therefore I shall go,'
Sméagol	's feet, wringing his hands and squeaking. '
Frodo	'Another way! '
Sam	's guess was that the Sméagol and Gollum halves (or what in his own mind he called Slinker and Stinker) had made a truce and a temporary alliance: neither wanted the Enemy to get the Ring; both wished to keep Frodo from capture, and under their eye, as long as possible - at any rate as long as Stinker still had a chance of laying hands on his '
Stinker	`And it'
Sméagol	`Sméagol,'
Sméagol	`Yes, yes, master! '
Frodo	'I did not mean the danger that we all share,'
Frodo	's threat had quite unnerved him. It was not easy to get any clear account out of him, amid his mumblings and squeakings, and the frequent interruptions in which he crawled on the floor and begged them both to be kind to `
Frodo	`No! '
Moon	`Tales out of the South,'
Frodo	`That would be Minas Ithil that Isildur the son of Elendil built '
Isildur	`Yes, He has only four on the Black Hand, but they are enough,'
Frodo	'What does he not hate? '
Sam	`But how will that help us? '
Sam	`So that'
Moon	`No, no indeed,'
Sam	'You seem to know a lot about what He'
Frodo	'Not nice hobbit, not sensible,'
Sam	`Just so! '
Sméagol	'Don'
Frodo	'What did you find? '
Sméagol	'A little path leading up into the mountains: and then a stair, a narrow stair, O yes, very long and narrow. And then more stairs. And then'
Sam	`I don'
Frodo	'Is it not guarded? '
Black	'It'
Frodo	'Is it not guarded? '
Black	`The Riders are about again, up in the air,'
Frodo	'No, perhaps not,'
Sméagol	'More Men going to Mordor,'
Sam	`Were there any oliphaunts?'
Bree	'That,'
Sméagol	`No, no oliphaunts,'
Sméagol	`I wish we had a thousand oliphaunts with Gandalf on a white one at their head,'
Frodo	'Good master, wise master, nice master!'
Sméagol	`Soon get more now,'
Sam	`Hi! Gollum! '
Sméagol	`Yes, perhaps, yes,'
Sam `I	`Right!'
Gamgee	's face very clearly, and his hands, too, lying at rest on the ground beside him. He was reminded suddenly of Frodo as he had lain, asleep in the house of Elrond, after his deadly wound. Then as he had kept watch Sam had noticed that at times a light seemed to be shining faintly within; but now the light was even clearer and stronger. Frodo'
Sméagol	'Sméagol always helps,'
Sam	'Never you mind,'
Sam	`Mustn'
Sam	'I don'
Sméagol	'Stew the rabbits!'
Sam	`Now, now! '
Sam	`Gollum!'
Sméagol	`No! '
Sam	`Sméagol'
Sméagol	`Sméagol won'
Sméagol	`Po-ta-toes,'
Sam	`Oh you'
Frodo	`About a couple of hours after daybreak,'
Sam	'A present from Sméagol,'
Sam	'Wheew! Gollum! '
Sam	`Oh well, I suppose he'
Frodo	`And then you must take some sleep,'
Stinker	`Don'
Frodo	`That won'
Frodo	`Hush! '
Frodo	'Not Orcs,'
Ithilien	`Nay! Not Elves,'
Sam	'Meaning we'
Faramir	`But we are neither,'
Faramir	'Then make haste to declare yourselves and your errand,'
Drogo	'I do not know where he is,'
Faramir	'Boromir son of the Lord Denethor?'
Frodo	'Are the riddling words known to you that Boromir brought to Rivendell? '
Faramir	'The words are known indeed,'
Frodo	`Aragorn whom I named is the bearer of the Sword that was Broken,'
Faramir	`That I see,'
Frodo	`That is hidden,'
Faramir	`We must learn more of this,'
Frodo	'Farewell!'
Faramir	'The Halflings are courteous folk, whatever else they be,'
Harad	`It is close on ten leagues hence to the east-shore of Anduin,'
Umbar	'Aye, curse the Southrons! '
Faramir	`But still we will not sit idle and let Him do all as He would,'
Frodo	`I wonder where that dratted Gollum is? '
Frodo	`It sounds like a hundred blacksmiths all smithying together,'
Damrod	`They are coming!'
Mablung	's first view of a battle of Men against Men, and he did not like it much. He was glad that he could not see the dead face. He wondered what the man'
Damrod	'Ware! Ware!'
Mablung	'Sleep while you may,'
Sam	`Go quietly when you must!'
Frodo	's aid if needed. He could see Faramir'
Frodo	's account of himself at several points: what part he had to play in the Company that set out from Rivendell; why he had left Boromir; and where he was now going. In particular he returned often to Isildur'
Boromir	'But it was at the coming of the Halfling that Isildur'
Faramir	'So! '
Frodo	'No, not because I choose,'
Elendil	'Because Aragorn is descended in direct lineage, father to father, from Isildur Elendil'
Faramir	'The sword of Elendil! The sword of Elendil comes to Minas Tirith! Great tidings! '
Frodo	'Boromir was satisfied of that claim,'
Boromir	`So!'
Faramir	's mind came the memory of Boromir'
Faramir	'I would grieve indeed,'
Faramir	`I would not snare even an orc with a falsehood,'
Faramir	`Many indeed,'
Faramir	'See here, Captain! '
Faramir	`Patience!'
Boromir	'You asked how do I know that the son of Denethor is dead. Tidings of death have many wings. Night oft brings news to near kindred, '
Faramir	`You remember well, and as one who has in truth seen him,'
Frodo	'Alas!'
Frodo	`It is beautiful,'
Frodo	'No more can I say than I have said,'
Faramir	'Nay, it was not so,'
Tol Brandir	`Yet how could such a thing have happened in truth? '
Faramir	'I know not,'
Frodo	`From Lórien,'
Faramir	'You passed through the Hidden Land,'
Laurelindórenan	`Boromir, O Boromir!'
Frodo	'No, I did not know of it,'
Faramir	`For me there is no comfort in our speech together,'
Denethor	`But whatever befell on the North March, you, Frodo, I doubt no longer. If hard days have made me any judge of Men'
Faramir	'Now you, Frodo and Samwise, will come with me and my guards,'
Faramir	'I broke off our speech together,'
Frodo	`I told no lies, and of the truth all I could,'
Faramir	`I do not blame you,'
Frodo	`Near,'
Elendil	`But, Frodo, I pressed you hard at first about Isildur'
Gondor	'And this I remember of Boromir as a boy, when we together learned the tale of our sires and the history of our city, that always it displeased him that his father was not king. "
Frodo	'It does,'
Faramir	'I doubt it not,'
Frodo	'The Grey Pilgrim? '
Faramir	'Mithrandir we called him in elf-fashion,'
Grey	'Gandalf!'
Faramir	'Mithrandir was lost! '
Frodo	'Alas! yes,'
Faramir	'I see that there is some great tale of dread in this.'
Mithrandir	's voice sank to a whisper. '
Frodo	'Neither did the Council,'
Faramir	`For myself,'
Faramir	'Here, alas! I must do you a discourtesy,'
Frodo	`As you will,'
Faramir	`It is to no place so fair that I shall lead you,'
Faramir	'Blindfold these guests,'
Faramir	'At least by good chance we came at the right hour to reward you for your patience,'
Faramir	'Well, here is our refuge,'
Faramir	'You saw and heard nothing, Anborn?'
Mirkwood	`Well, no, lord,'
Faramir	`Perhaps,'
Gamgee	`He may be all right,'
Sam	`No, before breakfast,'
Frodo	`No,'
Faramir	'That we do also,'
Mithrandir	`You may soon desire to sleep,'
Frodo	`He was the last,'
Faramir	`Maybe, it would have been better had Boromir fallen there with Mithrandir,'
Frodo	'Maybe. But tell me now of your own fortunes,'
Elendil	'What hope have we? '
Faramir	`Yet now, if the Rohirrim are grown in some ways more like to us, enhanced in arts and gentleness, we too have become more like to them, and can scarce claim any longer the title High. We are become Middle Men, of the Twilight, but with memory of other things. For as the Rohirrim do, we now love war and valour as things good in themselves, both a sport and an end; and though we still hold that a warrior should have more skills and knowledge than only the craft of weapons and slaying, we esteem a warrior, nonetheless, above men of other crafts. Such is the need of our days. So even was my brother, Boromir: a man of prowess, and for that he was accounted the best man in Gondor. And very valiant indeed he was: no heir of Minas Tirith has for long years been so hardy in toil, so onward into battle, or blown a mightier note on the Great Horn.'
Faramir	`You don'
Faramir	`No indeed, Master Samwise,'
Strider	`The Lady of Lórien! Galadriel!'
Faramir	'Then she must be lovely indeed,'
Lórien	`I don'
Faramir	`Yes? Now Boromir you would say? '
Lórien	`Yes sir, begging your pardon, and a fine man as your brother was if I may say so. But you'
Frodo	`Sam! '
Sam	'Save me! '
Faramir	`Now look here, sir! '
Faramir	'So it seems,'
Gondor	'Alas for Boromir! It was too sore a trial! '
Faramir	'Well, Frodo, now at last we understand one another,'
Frodo	`Not all is well there,'
Gorgoroth	'I was going to find a way into Mordor,'
Faramir	`Did I so?'
Gandalf	`Ah well, sir,'
Faramir	'Maybe,'
Faramir	`There is nothing to fear,'
Frodo	'Is it morning already? '
Faramir	`I will,'
Frodo	's ear alone as he thought: '
Anborn	`'
Faramir	`Shall we shoot? '
Sam	`No! '
Faramir	'You know, then, what this thing is? '
Frodo	'There are two answers, I think,'
Faramir	`He is lured here, you say? '
Faramir	'He bore it? '
Frodo	`Fish,'
Henneth Annûn	`Fish! '
Anborn	`Now I have him at the arrow-point,'
Faramir	`Wait, Anborn,'
Frodo	`The creature is wretched and hungry,'
Faramir	`Your guide! '
Frodo	`Let me go down quietly to him,'
Faramir	`Go then and be swift! '
Frodo	`Go on! '
Frodo	'Come, Sméagol! '
Sméagol	'No!'
Frodo	`There'
Frodo	'Sméagol! '
Sméagol	`Nice Master! '
Frodo	`Yes, we'
Faramir	'Away up there,'
Frodo	`Easy, easy! '
Frodo	`Got him?'
Sam	`So do I,'
Faramir	`Nothing? '
Faramir	'The price is not set on the fish,'
Faramir	'Not very wise,'
Frodo	'Now, Sméagol! '
Faramir	'Come hither! '
Faramir	`There are locked doors and closed windows in your mind, and dark rooms behind them,'
Frodo	`Master knows,'
Faramir	`Are you satisfied? '
Frodo	`Yes,'
Drogo	`Very good,'
Frodo	'But, Lord Faramir,'
Faramir	`Then I will declare my doom,'
Faramir	`It is of great worth,'
Frodo	`I do take Sméagol under my protection,'
Faramir	'Then I say to you,'
Faramir	`This I will not have secret,'
Frodo	`I will answer for him,'
Faramir	`There is no open gate into the Nameless Land,'
Frodo	`Seeing this, we turned aside and came by the Southward road '
Faramir	`Minas Morgul,'
Frodo	`I do not know clearly,'
Faramir	`Do you know the name of that high pass? '
Frodo	'No,'
Faramir	'It is called Cirith Ungol.'
Faramir	'No other way? '
Faramir	`Frodo, I think you do very unwisely in this,'
Frodo	'No, not altogether wicked,'
Faramir	'Not wholly, perhaps,'
Frodo	`He would not take it,'
Faramir	'No,'
Frodo	`Where then shall I go? '
Faramir	`Nothing certain,'
Frodo	'But where else will you direct me? '
Faramir	`I would not have it so,'
Frodo	'Yet since he is gone, I must take such paths as I can find. And there is no time for long searching,'
Faramir	`It is a hard doom and a hopeless errand,'
Faramir	`May no hunger trouble you on the road,'
Faramir	'I have no fitting gifts to give you at our parting,'
Frodo	`Most gracious host,'
Faramir	'Your guide must be blindfolded,'
Faramir	'Blindfold us all three, and cover up my eyes first, and then perhaps he will see that no harm is meant.'
Faramir	'Here is the last parting of our ways,'
Sam	`Hungry again already?'
Sméagol	'Have they gone at last? '
Frodo	`Yes, let us go,'
Sméagol	`Nice Master! '
Sam	`Oh come! '
Sam	'We aren'
Frodo	`Which way do we go from here?'
Sam	`Need we think about it yet?'
bracken	`Off hunting, I suppose,'
Frodo	`Haven'
Frodo	'No it isn'
Sam	'I wonder what'
Frodo	'I don'
Frodo	`No,'
Sam	`Well, I can'
Frodo	`You forget the Marshes,'
Frodo	'I think we are in for trouble anyhow,'
Frodo	'Maybe,'
Frodo	`Silly! '
Frodo	'They mustn'
Sam	's head: it was lying rolled away by the roadside. `
Frodo	'They cannot conquer for ever!'
Frodo	`Hold up, Mr. Frodo! '
Frodo	`I must rest a while, Sam,'
Frodo	`Sssh! ssh! '
Sam	`Come, Mr. Frodo,'
Frodo	'All right,'
Faramir	'The storm has burst at last,'
Frodo	's voice speaking. `
Frodo	'Wake up, Mr. Frodo! They'
Sam	'And what after that? '
Sam	'I thought you said there was a tunnel,'
Sam	'I don'
Frodo	'Perhaps,'
Frodo	`Yes, we must rest,'
Sam	`I wonder when we'
Frodo	'Yes, they drink,'
Faramir	`Then all the more need to fill our bottles,'
Frodo	'No water flowing out of Imlad Morgul, were his words,'
Sam	'I wouldn'
Frodo	'I don'
Frodo	'Yes, that'
Frodo	`I wonder,'
Silmaril	'No, sir, of course not. Beren now, he never thought he was going to get that Silmaril from the Iron Crown in Thangorodrim, and yet he did, and that was a worse place and a blacker danger than ours. But that'
Frodo	'No, they never end as tales,'
Frodo	'And then we can have some rest and some sleep,'
Sauron	`It'
Sam	`Now, Mr. Frodo,'
Frodo	`So was I,'
Thing	`Maybe,'
Sam	`I don'
Frodo	`It'
Sam	'All the same, I'
Frodo	`No, I don'
Frodo	`Well, I suppose you'
Frodo	'Very likely he can'
Stinker	'Yes, Slinker and Stinker, as I'
Frodo	`We haven'
Stinker	'No, but we'
Frodo	`Sleep!'
Sam	`I daresay,'
Sméagol	`Sneaking, sneaking!'
Frodo	'Sorry.'
Sam	'O very well,'
Sméagol	'It'
Frodo	`I think we shall get tired of that word soon,'
Sam	's face bending over him. `
Frodo	'Yes it'
Sméagol	`The last lap! '
Frodo	'Don'
Master Samwise	`Sméagol has to take what'
Frodo	'Come, let it pass then,'
Sméagol	`No, no, not yet,'
Shelob	`This is the way in,'
Frodo	`Is this the only way, Sméagol? '
Sam	'D'
Sméagol	's eyes glinted. `
Sam	`And what makes the smell, I wonder,'
Frodo	'Well,'
Sam	`Which way has Gollum gone? '
Frodo	`Sméagol! '
Sam	`He'
Frodo	'This can'
Sam	'And quick! '
Tom	`It'
Sam	'Master, master!'
Frodo	`The star-glass?'
Frodo	`Galadriel! '
Sam	'Master, master!'
Frodo	`No, not to be seen,'
Faramir	`Trapped in the end! '
Frodo	'That would not help us now,'
Frodo	`Come! '
Sméagol	`We'
Shelob	`Got him! '
Sam	's mouth slipped, and Sam ducked and lunged forward again, trying to tear away from the grip on his neck. His sword was still in his hand, and on his left arm, hanging by its thong, was Faramir'
Sam	's head. Poison frothed and bubbled from the wound. Now splaying her legs she drove her huge bulk down on him again. Too soon. For Sam still stood upon his feet, and dropping his own sword, with both hands he held the elven-blade point upwards, fending off that ghastly roof; and so Shelob, with the driving force of her own cruel will, with strength greater than any warrior'
Elrond	'Galadriel! '
Shelob	'Master, dear master,'
Sam	`Master, dear master! '
Frodo	`Frodo, Mr. Frodo! '
Frodo	's body in a rage, stabbing the air, and smiting the stones, and shouting challenges. Presently he came back, and bending looked at Frodo'
Frodo	'If I'
Gandalf	`I wish I wasn'
Frodo	'But you haven'
Gamgee	`Ah well, I must make up my own mind. I will make it up. But I'
Lorien	'Let me see now: if we'
Sam	`Good-bye, master, my dear! '
Frodo	`How many are there?'
Shelob	'Can'
Shelob	`Go on, Gorbag! Yours are making more than half the noise,'
Shagrat	`Sh, Gorbag!'
Gorbag	`Nearly, you say! '
Shagrat	`All right,'
Gorbag	's body for some foul purpose and he could not follow. He thrust and pushed at the block, and he threw himself against it, but it did not yield. Then not far inside, or so he thought, he heard the two captains'
Gorbag	`No, I don'
Shagrat	`You should try being up here with Shelob for company,'
Gorbag	'They would.'
Shagrat	'Ah! '
Gorbag	`Yes,'
Gorbag	'Bad business,'
Shagrat	`The Eye was busy elsewhere, I suppose,'
Gorbag	'I daresay,'
Shelob	`You must have seen him: little thin black fellow; like a spider himself, or perhaps more like a starved frog. He'
Lugbúrz	`Got him? Got who? This little fellow? But if he was the only one then she'
Shagrat	'Who cut the cords she'
Shelob	`You may well put your thinking cap on, if you'
Shagrat	`And what is it then? '
Gorbag	`By all the signs, Captain Shagrat, I'
Shagrat	'Ah well, you always did take a gloomy view.'
Gorbag	`It'
Shagrat	'Now, now,'
Gorbag	'Stripped, eh? '
Lugbúrz	`No, none of that. He'
Gorbag	'You'
Carrion	'You fool,'
Samwise	'You fool, he isn'
Shagrat	`Garn!'
Gorbag	'And what'
Shagrat	`There'
Lugbúrz	`All right! But if I were you, I'
Shagrat	`That'
Gorbag	`What for? '
Shagrat	`He'
Sam	`Will he?'
Boromir	'Alas! An ill fate is on me this day, and all that I do goes amiss. Where is Sam?'
Frodo	'They have gone: the Halflings: the Orcs have taken them. I think they are not dead. Orcs bound them.'
Denethor	's trust in me. What shall I do now? Boromir has laid it on me to go to Minas Tirith, and my heart desires it; but where are the Ring and the Bearer? How shall I find them and save the Quest from disaster?'
Legolas	'We have hunted and slain many Orcs in the woods, but we should have been of more use here. We came when we heard the horn-but too late, it seems. I fear you have taken deadly hurt.'
Boromir	'I am unscathed, for I was not here with him. He fell defending the hobbits, while I was away upon the hill.'
Gimli	'Where are they then? Where is Frodo?'
Legolas	'We cannot leave him lying like carrion among these foul Orcs.'
Gimli	'He would not wish us to linger. We must follow the Orcs, if there is hope that any of our Company are living prisoners.'
Legolas	'We have not the time or the tools to bury our comrade fitly, or to raise a mound over him. A cairn we might build.'
Legolas	'will take all the arrows that I can find, for my quiver is empty.'
Sauron	'That is easy to read.'
Legolas	'Sauron does not use the Elf-runes.'
Isengard	's fall. Pursuers from Moria may have escaped the vigilance of Lórien, or they may have avoided that land and come to Isengard by other paths. Orcs travel fast. But Saruman has many ways of learning news. Do you remember the birds?'
Gimli	'Let us bear Boromir away!'
Legolas	'There are only two boats upon the bank. We could find no trace of the other.'
Gimli	'And Orcs would have taken or destroyed all the boats, and the baggage as well.'
Gimli	'but I will say naught of it.'
Frodo	'A hobbit waded out into the water and back; but I cannot say how long ago.'
Sam	's: it was rather large and heavy. This then is the answer: Frodo has gone by boat, and his servant has gone with him. Frodo must have returned while we were all away. I met Sam going up the hill and told him to follow me; but plainly he did not do so. He guessed his master s mind and came back here before Frodo had gone. He did not find it easy to leave Sam behind!'
Gimli	'That was a strange deed!'
Legolas	'Frodo is no longer on this side of the River: only he can have taken the boat. And Sam is with him; only he would have taken his pack.'
Gimli	'is either to take the remaining boat and follow Frodo, or else to follow the Orcs on foot. There is little hope either way. We have already lost precious hours.'
Legolas	'It seems their delight to slash and beat down growing things that are not even in their way.'
Gimli	'Dwarves too can go swiftly, and they do not tire sooner than Orcs. But it will be a long chase: they have a long start.'
Legolas	'Northward to take a straighter road to Isengard, or Fangorn, if that is their aim as you guess? Or southward to strike the Entwash?'
Gimli	'But it needs the light of day and for that we cannot wait.'
Legolas	'Enemies of the Orcs are likely to be our friends. Do any folk dwell in these hills?'
Gimli	'Let us hope that they, too, did not meet their end here.'
Gondor	' cried Aragorn. '
Legolas	'There is the eagle again! He is very high. He seems to be flying now away, from this land back to the North. He is going with great speed. Look!'
Legolas	'He must be far aloft indeed. I wonder what is his errand, if he is the same bird that I have seen before. But look! I can see something nearer at hand and more urgent; there is something moving over the plain!'
Legolas	'It is a great company on foot; but I cannot say more, nor see what kind of folk they may be. They are many leagues away: twelve, I guess; but the flatness of the plain is hard to measure.'
Gimli	'Let us find a path down to the fields as quick as may be.'
Rohan	'Do not follow me yet!'
Lórien	'This did not drop by chance: it was cast away as a token to any that might follow. I think Pippin ran away from the trail for that purpose.'
Gimli	'And he had the use of his wits, and of his legs too. That is heartening. We do not pursue in vain.'
Legolas	'Come! Let us go on! The thought of those merry young folk driven like cattle burns my heart.'
Legolas	'Certainly they will not rest by night.'
Gimli	'only by day can we see if any tracks lead away. If a prisoner should escape, or if one should be carried off, eastward, say, to the Great River, towards Mordor, we might pass the signs and never know it.'
Gimli	'And what of escape? In the dark we should have passed the signs that led you to the brooch.'
Legolas	'There will be no escape again, if we do not contrive it. How that is to be done cannot be guessed, but first we must overtake them.'
Isengard	'My heart burns me too, and I would have started sooner but now I must rest a little to run the better. And if we rest, then the blind night is the time to do so.'
Gimli	'and you are skilled in the chase. You shall choose.'
Legolas	'But we must hold together. I will follow your counsel.'
Gimli	'Would that the Lady had given us a light, such a gift as she gave to Frodo!'
Gimli	'Even Legolas on a hill-top could not see them till the Sun is up.'
Legolas	'The Orcs have run before us, as if the very whips of Sauron were behind them. I fear they have already reached the forest and the dark hills, and even now are passing into the shadows of the trees.'
Gimli	'This is a bitter end to our hope and to all our toil!'
Rohan	'But he shall not turn us back! Halt we must once more; for, see! even the Moon is falling into gathering cloud. But north lies our road between down and fen when day returns.'
Legolas	'It is a red dawn. Strange things await us by the eaves of the forest. Good or evil, I do not know; but we are called. Awake!'
Gimli	'Could we see the forest, if we climbed the hills?'
Gimli	'My legs must forget the miles. They would be more willing, if my heart were less heavy.'
Gimli	'Well, now we must halt again and wear the night away. It is growing cold!'
Legolas	'But rest if you must. Yet do not cast all hope away. Tomorrow is unknown. Rede oft is found at the rising of the Sun.'
Legolas	'there are one hundred and five. Yellow is their hair, and bright are their spears. Their leader is very tall.'
Gimli	'we cannot escape them in this bare land. Shall we wait for them here or go on our way?'
Legolas	'Already they approach.'
Strider	'I came out of the North. I am hunting Orcs.'
Strider	'That is no name for a Man that you give. And strange too is your raiment. Have you sprung out of the grass? How did you escape our sight? Are you elvish folk?'
Legolas	'Why do you not speak, silent ones?'
Gimli	'Give me your name, horse-master, and I will give you mine, and more besides,'
Éomer	's son warn you against foolish words. You speak evil of that which is fair beyond the reach of your thought, and only little wit can excuse you.'
Éomer	'I would cut off your head, beard and all, Master Dwarf, if it stood but a little higher from the ground '
Legolas	'You would die before your stroke fell.'
Éomer	'When you know more you will understand why you have angered my companions. We intend no evil to Rohan, nor to any of its folk, neither to man nor to horse. Will you not hear our tale before you strike?'
Éomer	'But wanderers in the Riddermark would be wise to be less haughty in these days of doubt. First tell me your right name.'
Éomer	'We do not serve the Power of the Black Land far away, but neither are we yet at open war with him; and if you are fleeing from him, then you had best leave this land. There is trouble now on all our borders, and we are threatened; but we desire only to be free, and to live as we have lived, keeping our own, and serving no foreign lord, good or evil. We welcomed guests kindly in the better days, but in these times the unbidden stranger finds us swift and hard. Come! Who are you? Whom do you serve? At whose command do you hunt Orcs in our land?'
Elendil	's son of Gondor. Here is the Sword that was Broken and is forged again! Will you aid me or thwart me? Choose swiftly!'
Éomer	' he muttered. '
Éomer	'The Orcs are destroyed.'
Éomer	'We counted all the slain and despoiled them, and then we piled the carcases and burned them, as is our custom. The ashes are smoking still.'
Gimli	'Our friends were hobbits.'
Éomer	'And what may they be? It is a strange name.'
Gimli	'But these were very dear to us. It seems that you have heard in Rohan of the words that troubled Minas Tirith. They spoke of the Halfling. These hobbits are Halflings.'
Éomer	's tales out of the North. Do we walk in legends or on the green earth in the daylight?'
Éomer	' and make ready to ride to the Entwade.'
Éomer	'Gandalf Greyhame is known in the Mark: but his name, I warn you, is no longer a password to the king'
Isengard	's anger is not less, for now the horse is wild and will let no man handle him.'
Shadowfax	'for it was there that he and Gandalf parted. But alas! Gandalf will ride no longer. He fell into darkness in the Mines of Moria and comes not again.'
Éomer	'At least to me, and to many; though not to all, as you may find, if you come to the king.'
Éomer	'Great harm is this death to Minas Tirith, and to us all. That was a worthy man! All spoke his praise. He came seldom to the Mark, for he was ever in the wars on the East-borders; but I have seen him. More like to the swift sons of Eorl than to the grave Men of Gondor he seemed to me, and likely to prove a great captain of his people when his time came. But we have had no word of this grief out of Gondor. When did he fall?'
Éomer	' he said. '
Théoden	's ear, that speak craven counsels; but war is coming. We shall not forsake our old alliance with Gondor, and while they fight we shall aid them: so say I and all who hold with me. The East-mark is my charge. the ward of the Third Marshal, and I have removed all our herds and herdfolk, withdrawing them beyond Entwash, and leaving none here but guards and swift scouts.'
Isengard	's house, you shall see for yourself. Will you not come? Do I hope in vain that you have been sent to me for a help in doubt and need?'
Gimli	's axe and the bow of Legolas, if they will pardon my rash words concerning the Lady of the Wood. I spoke only as do all men in my land, and I would gladly learn better.'
Éomer	'You will not find your friends on the North-borders.'
Éomer	'We reached the forest-eaves before them, and if after that any living thing broke through our ring, then it was no Orc and had some elvish power.'
Éomer	'It is hard to be sure of anything among so many marvels. The world is all grown strange. Elf and Dwarf in company walk in our daily fields; and folk speak with the Lady of the Wood and yet live; and the Sword comes back to war that was broken in the long ages ere the fathers of our fathers rode into the Mark! How shall a man judge what to do in such times?'
Éomer	'But I do not doubt you, nor the deed which my heart would do. Yet I am not free to do all as I would. It is against our law to let strangers wander at will in our land, until the king himself shall give them leave, and more strict is the command in these days of peril. I have begged you to come back willingly with me, and you will not. Loth am I to begin a battle of one hundred against three.'
Éomer	'My company chafes to be away, and every hour lessens your hope. This is my choice. You may go; and what is more, I will lend you horses. This only I ask: when your quest is achieved, or is proved vain, return with the horses over the Entwade to Meduseld, the high house in Edoras where Théoden now sits. Thus you shall prove to him that I have not misjudged. In this I place myself, and maybe my very life, in the keeping of your good faith. Do not fail.'
Gondor	'but who has heard of a horse of the Mark being given to a Dwarf?'
Gimli	'And do not trouble: no one will ever hear of it. I would sooner walk than sit on the back of any beast so great, free or begrudged.'
Éomer	'May he bear you well and to better fortune than Gárulf, his late master!'
Legolas	'I need them not,'
Éomer	'Return with what speed you may, and let our swords hereafter shine together!'
Gimli	'The matter of the Lady Galadriel lies still between us. I have yet to teach you gentle speech. '
Éomer	's axe will seem no great wonder. Farewell!'
Tol Brandir	'. It will be hard news for Frodo, if he lives to hear it; and hard too for the old hobbit who waits in Rivendell. Elrond was against their coming.'
Gandalf	'His foresight failed him.'
Gandalf	'There are some things that it is better to begin than to refuse, even though the end may be dark. But I shall not depart from this place yet. In any case we must here await the morning-light.'
Gimli	'I care no longer for the danger. Let the Orcs come as thick as summer-moths round a candle!'
Rohirrim	'and they felled trees for the fire, as can be seen. Yet they passed the night after safely here, when their labour was ended.'
Gimli	'The Riders have left chip and bough enough, and there is dead wood lying in plenty.'
Fangorn	'Do you know why, Aragorn? What are the fables of the forest that Boromir had heard?'
Gondor	'but if it were not for the words of Celeborn I should deem them only fables that Men have made as true knowledge fades. I had thought of asking you what was the truth of the matter. And if an Elf of the Wood does not know, how shall a Man answer?'
Legolas	'I have heard nothing of this in my own land, save only songs that tell how the Onodrim, that Men call Ents, dwelt there long ago; for Fangorn is old, old even as the Elves would reckon it.'
Gimli	'Let nothing that dwells in Fangorn be troubled on my account!'
Gimli	'Remember, it is perilous to cut bough or twig from a living tree in Fangorn. But do not stray far in search of dead wood. Let the fire die rather! Call me at need!'
Legolas	'The horses! The horses!'
Gimli	'But we cannot eat them as well as walk on them '
Rohan	'You will make a rider yet.'
Merry	't the Orcs kill us? Where are we, and where are we going?'
Strider	't that throw out all the plans? I wish I could get free!'
Pippin	'll wish you had got none before we get home.'
Pippin	't draw attention to yourself, or I may forget my orders. Curse the Isengarders! Uglúk u bagronk sha pushdug Saruman-glob búbhosh skai'
Pippin	's surprise he found that much of the talk was intelligible many of the Orcs were using ordinary language. Apparently the members of two or three quite different tribes were present, and they could not understand one another'
Saruman	'We should go back at once to Lugbúrz.'
Uglúk	's-flesh to eat. We came out of Isengard, and led you here, and we shall lead you back by the way we choose. I am Uglúk. I have spoken.'
Uglúk	'I wonder how they would like it in Lugbúrz. They might think that Uglúk'
Uglúk	's prostrate form with a curse. Yet that probably saved his life, for Uglúk'
Uglúk	's have no more nonsense! We go straight west from here, and down the stair. From there straight to the downs, then along the river to the forest. And we march day and night. That clear?'
Pippin	've got a chance.'
Uglúk	't play any tricks with them! If they are not alive when we get back, someone else will die too.'
Merry	's clawlike hand gripped Pippin'
Uglúk	't spoil your usefulness for the Master.'
Pippin	've come on this little expedition, too? Where do we get bed and breakfast?'
Uglúk	'll get bed and breakfast all right: more than you can stomach.'
Uglúk	'West and a little north. Follow Lugdush.'
Uglúk	'What do you think? Sit on the grass and wait for the Whiteskins to join the picnic?'
Uglúk	's the use of sending out mountain-maggots on a trip, only half trained. Run, curse you! Run while night lasts!'
Pippin	've probably all gone with Frodo.'
Uglúk	'em both run! Just use the whip as a reminder.'
Pippin	't forget. Payment is only put off. Leg it!'
Uglúk	's your best hope. Off you go! And quick, before I knock a few more heads off, to put some sense into the others.'
Uglúk	'll feast on horseflesh yet, or something better.'
Uglúk	'Thought better of it, eh?'
Uglúk	'll see that orders are carried out in my command. And what else did you come back for? You went in a hurry. Did you leave anything behind?'
Grishnákh	've come to help them.'
Uglúk	'd brought him along, that might have been useful-if these Nazgûl are all they make out.'
Uglúk	're for the War-and other purposes.'
Uglúk	'll be on your heels.'
Isengard	's, the Isengarders gradually passed through the Orcs of Mordor, and Grishnákh'
Isengard	're coming!'
Grishnákh	'Fine leadership! I hope the great Uglúk will lead us out again.'
Uglúk	're not to be rescued. Bind their legs!'
Merry	't think I could crawl away far, even if I was free.'
Pippin	've taken anything but our swords.'
Merry	't put my mouth in my pocket!'
Uglúk	's doing, I should like to know?'
Uglúk	're as bad as the other rabble: the maggots and the apes of Lugbúrz. No good trying to charge with them. They'
Grishnákh	'Enjoying your nice rest? Or not? A little awkwardly placed, perhaps: swords and whips on one side, and nasty spears on the other! Little people should not meddle _in affairs that are too big for them.'
Uglúk	's heart, yet at the same time he was wondering what use he could make of Grishnákh'
Grishnákh	'Nothing, my precious,'
Grishnákh	's what he means, is it? O ho! Very ve-ry dangerous, my little ones.'
Merry	'Perhaps; and not only for us. Still you know your own business best. Do you want it, or not? And what would you give for it?'
Grishnákh	'What would I give for it? What do you mean?'
Pippin	'll do nothing, and say nothing.'
Uglúk	's faults.'
Isengard	's the time to do a deal.'
Merry	'So far so good: but how are we to avoid being spitted?'
Merry	't bite them.'
Pippin	'd better have a bit of lembas first.'
Mauhúr	'lads'
Pippin	'Those cords have cut me like wires; but my feet are getting warm again. I could stagger on now. What about you, Merry?'
Merry	's get a drink of water to wash away the thought of it!'
Pippin	'Forward now!'
Merry	's book, if ever I get a chance to report to him. Good work: especially guessing that hairy villain'
Brandybuck	't suppose you have much notion where we are; but I spent my time at Rivendell rather better. We are walking west along the Entwash. The butt-end of the Misty Mountains is in front, and Fangorn Forest.'
Brandybuck	'Or lead back! We have been warned against Fangorn. But one so knowing will not have forgotten that.'
Merry	'but the forest seems better to me, all the same, than turning back into the middle of a battle.'
Uglúk	't want to meet him again.'
Merry	'I want some air.'
Pippin	'm parched.'
Pippin	'We can at least follow the course of this stream, the Entwash or whatever you call it, and get out again the way we came.'
Merry	'and if we could breathe properly.'
Pippin	't imagine what spring would look like here, if it ever comes; still less a spring-cleaning.'
Merry	't imagine animals living here at all, or staying for long.'
Pippin	't like the thought of trying to get through it either. Nothing to eat for a hundred miles, I should guess. How are our supplies?'
Merry	'We shall be cold tonight, whichever way we go.'
Pippin	'The morning must be getting on.'
Merry	's go and investigate!'
Merry	'Now for a breath of air, and a sight of the land!'
Merry	's turned east again. It feels cool up here.'
Pippin	'm afraid this is only a passing gleam, and it will all go grey again. What a pity! This shaggy old forest looked so different in the sunlight. I almost felt I liked the place.'
Hoom	'Very odd indeed! Do not be hasty, that is my motto. But if I had seen you, before I heard your voices - I liked them: nice little voices; they reminded me of something I cannot remember - if I had seen you before I heard you, I should have just trodden on you, taking you for little Orcs, and found out my mistake afterwards. Very odd you are, indeed. Root and twig, very odd!'
Pippin	'who are you? And what are you?'
Merry	's your real name?'
Merry	're hobbits.'
Hoom	're not careful.'
Merry	'm a Brandybuck, Meriadoc Brandybuck, though most people call me just Merry.'
Peregrin Took	'm generally called Pippin, or even Pip.'
Merry	'For one thing it would take a long while: my name is growing all the time, and I'
Gandalf	'these Orcs, and young Saruman down at Isengard? I like news. But not too quick now.'
Merry	'and even if we tried to be quick, it would take a long time to tell. But you told us not to be hasty. Ought we to tell you anything so soon? Would you think it rude, if we asked what you are going to do with us, and which side you are on? And did you know Gandalf?'
Pippin	'we did. He was a great friend, and he was our guide.'
Pippin	'The story seems to be going on, but I am afraid Gandalf has fallen out of it.'
Hoom	'Hoom, ah, well I do not know what to say. Come now!'
Merry	't we sit here together in the sun, while it lasts? You must be getting tired of holding us up.'
Pippin	'Shelf? Step?'
Merry	'We have only a little food.'
Laurelindórenan	' he said '
Pippin	'What is true?'
Elrond	'Well, not Ents, Entwives I should really say.'
Pippin	'Are they like you at all?'
Rohan	'Well, well! That is a bundle of news and no mistake. You have not told me all, no indeed, not by a long way. But I do not doubt that you are doing as Gandalf would wish. There is something very big going on, that I can see, and what it is maybe I shall learn in good time, or in bad time. By root and twig, but it is a strange business: up sprout a little folk that are not in the old lists, and behold the Nine forgotten Riders reappear to hunt them, and Gandalf takes them on a great journey, and Galadriel harbours them in Caras Galadhon, and Orcs pursue them down all the leagues of Wilderland: indeed they seem to be caught up in a great storm. I hope they weather it!'
Hoom	' (he again made a deep rumble of disgust)'
Pippin	' answered Treebeard. '
Isengard	's Orcs can endure it, even if they hate it. I wonder what he has done? Are they Men he has ruined, or has he blended the races of Orcs and Men? That would be a black evil!'
Entish	' he went on. '
Merry	'We will do what we can.'
Pippin	'I should like to see the White Hand overthrown. I should like to be there, even if I could not be of much use: I shall never forget Uglúk and the crossing of Rohan.'
Fladrif	'Only three remain of the first Ents that walked in the woods before the Darkness: only myself, Fangorn, and Finglas and Fladrif - to give them their Elvish names; you may call them Leaflock and Skinbark if you like that better. And of us three Leaflock and Skinbark are not much use for this business. Leaflock has grown sleepy, almost tree-ish, you might say: he has taken to standing by himself half-asleep all through the summer with the deep grass of the meadows round his knees. Covered with leafy hair he is. He used to rouse up in winter; but of late he has been too drowsy to walk far even then. Skinbark lived on the mountain-slopes west of Isengard. That is where the worst trouble has been. He was wounded by the Orcs, and many of his folk and his tree-herds have been murdered and destroyed. He has gone up into the high places, among the birches that he loves best, and he will not come down. Still, I daresay I could get together a fair company of our younger folks - if I could make them understand the need: if I could rouse them: we are not a hasty folk. What a pity there are so few of us!'
Pippin	'Have a great many died?'
Pippin	'How was it that they all died?'
Merry	't you tell us some more, or sing us one of the songs?'
Merry	'We shall be all right where we are.'
Merry	'You sleep long. I have been many a hundred strides already today. Now we will have a drink, and go to Entmoot.'
Pippin	'ent-strides'
Entish	'I wonder what the Entish is for yes or no,'
Pippin	'You are a hasty folk, I was forgetting; and anyway it is wearisome listening to a speech you do not understand. You may get down now. I have told your names to the Entmoot, and they have seen you, and they have agreed that you are not Orcs, and that a new line shall be put in the old lists. We have got no further yet, but that is quick work for an Entmoot. You and Merry can stroll about in the dingle, if you like. There is a well of good water, if you need refreshing, away yonder in the north bank. There are still some words to speak before the Moot really begins. I will come and see you again, and tell you how things are going.'
Isengard	't you think?'
Isengard	'I wonder what Ents can do about it anyway.'
Isengard	't think they are quite as safe and, well funny as they seem. They seem slow, queer, and patient, almost sad; and yet I believe they could be roused. If that happened, I would rather not be on the other side.'
Pippin	't like being roused. Treebeard got roused himself last night, and then bottled it up again.'
Bregalad	'. He was tall, and seemed to be one of the younger Ents; he had smooth shining skin on his arms and legs; his lips were ruddy, and his hair was grey-green. He could bend and sway like a slender tree in the wind. At last he spoke, and his voice though resonant was higher and clearer than Treebeard'
Bregalad	'hastiness'
Hoom	'Come, join the Moot! We are off. We are off to Isengard!'
Saruman	't he?'
Aye	'we may help the other peoples before we pass away. Still, I should have liked to see the songs come true about the Entwives. I should dearly have liked to see Fimbrethil again. But there, my friends, songs like trees bear fruit only in their own time and their own way: and sometimes they are withered untimely.'
Gimli	'I should be happier if I could see the print of a boot.'
Gimli	'A bent blade is enough for Aragorn to read. But I do not expect him to find any traces. It was an evil phantom of Saruman that we saw last night. I am sure of it, even under the light of morning. His eyes are looking out on us from Fangorn even now, maybe.'
Legolas	'I heard them clearly. But for the darkness and our own fear I should have guessed that they were beasts wild with some sudden gladness. They spoke as horses will when they meet a friend that they have long missed.'
Gimli	'It was an orc-weapon,'
Legolas	'A bound prisoner escapes both from the Orcs and from the surrounding horsemen. He then stops, while still in the open, and cuts his bonds with an orc-knife. But how and why? For if his legs were tied, how did he walk? And if his arms were tied, how did he use the knife? And if neither were tied, why did he cut the cords at all? Being pleased with his skill, he then sat down and quietly ate some waybread! That at least is enough to show that he was a hobbit, without the mallorn-leaf. After that, I suppose, he turned his arms into wings and flew away singing into the trees. It should be easy to find him: we only need wings ourselves!'
Gimli	'What was that old man doing? What have you to say, Aragorn, to the reading of Legolas. Can you better it?'
Gimli	'But I do not like the look of this Fangorn: and we were warned against it. I wish the chase had led anywhere else!'
Legolas	'No, it is not evil; or what evil is in it is far away. I catch only the faintest echoes of dark places where the hearts of the trees are black. There is no malice near us; but there is watchfulness, and anger.'
Gimli	'I have done it no harm. '
Legolas	'But nonetheless it has suffered harm. There is something happening inside, or going to happen. Do you not feel the tenseness? It takes my breath.'
Gimli	'I do not wish to meet that old man at unawares without an argument ready to hand, that is all. Let us go!'
Gimli	'We cannot pursue them through the whole fastness of Fangorn. We have come ill supplied. If we do not find them soon, we shall be of no use to them, except to sit down beside them and show our friendship by starving together.'
Legolas	'I will feel my breath short. I should like to taste a freer air for a while.'
Legolas	'We could have all come here safe together, if we had left the Great River on the second or third day and struck west. Few can foresee whither their road will lead them, till they come to its end.'
Legolas	'Look!'
Legolas	'Down in the wood, back in the Way that we have just come. It is he. Cannot you see him, passing from tree to tree?'
Gimli	'Look, Aragorn! Did I not warn you? There is the old man. All in dirty grey rags: that is why I could not see him at first.'
Gimli	'Your bow, Legolas! Bend it! Get ready! It is Saruman. Do not let him speak, or put a spell upon us! Shoot first!'
Legolas	'We may not shoot an old man so, at unawares and unchallenged, whatever fear or doubt be on us. Watch and wait!'
Gimli	'Stop him, Legolas!'
Fangorn	'Is that so?'
Saruman	'speak! Tell us where you have hidden our friends! What have you done with them? Speak, or I will make a dint in your hat that even a wizard will find it hard to deal with!'
Mithrandir	'Mithrandir!'
Gandalf	'Beyond all hope you return to us in our need! What veil was over my sight? Gandalf!'
Gandalf	'Yes, that was the name. I was Gandalf.'
Gandalf	'Get up, my good Gimli! No blame to you, and no harm done to me. Indeed my friends, none of you have any weapon that could hurt me. Be merry! We meet again. At the turn of the tide. The great storm is coming, but the tide has turned.'
Gandalf	'But you are all in white!'
Gandalf	'Indeed I am Saruman, one might almost say, Saruman as he should have been. But come now, tell me of yourselves! I have passed through fire and deep water, since we parted. I have forgotten much that I thought I knew, and learned again much that I had forgotten. I can see many things far off, but many things that are close at hand I cannot see. Tell me of yourselves!'
Gandalf	'There was a darkness over the valleys of the Emyn Muil, and I did not know of their captivity, until the eagle told me.'
Legolas	'I have seen an eagle high and far off: the last time was three days ago, above the Emyn Muil.'
Gandalf	'that was Gwaihir the Windlord, who rescued me from Orthanc. I sent him before me to watch the River and gather tidings. His sight is keen, but he cannot see all that passes under hill and tree. Some things he has seen, and others I have seen myself. The Ring now has passed beyond my help, or the help of any of the Company that set out from Rivendell. Very nearly it was revealed to the Enemy, but it escaped. I had some part in that: for I sat in a high place, and I strove with the Dark Tower; and the Shadow passed. Then I was weary, very weary; and I walked long in dark thought.'
Frodo	'How do things go with him?'
Legolas	'We think that Sam went with him.'
Gandalf	'Did he indeed? It is news to me, yet it does not surprise me. Good! Very good! You lighten my heart. You must tell me more. Now sit by me and tell me the tale of your journey.'
Boromir	's sake. But that is not the only part they have to play. They were brought to Fangorn, and their coming was like the falling of small stones that starts an avalanche in the mountains. Even as we talk here, I hear the first rumblings. Saruman had best not be caught away from home when the dam bursts!'
Gandalf	'No! For I was talking aloud to myself. A habit of the old: they choose the wisest person present to speak to; the long explanations needed by the young are wearying.'
Gimli	'If no land divided Isengard and Mordor, then they could fight while we watched and waited.'
Gandalf	'But Isengard cannot fight Mordor, unless Saruman first obtains the Ring. That he will never do now. He does not yet know his peril. There is much that he does not know. He was so eager to lay his hands on his prey that he could not wait at home, and he came forth to meet and to spy on his messengers. But he came too late, for once, and the battle was over and beyond his help before he reached these parts. He did not remain here long. I look into his mind and I see his doubt. He has no woodcraft. He believes that the horsemen slew and burned all upon the field of battle; but he does not know whether the Orcs were bringing any prisoners or not. And he does not know of the quarrel between his servants and the Orcs of Mordor; nor does he know of the Winged Messenger.'
Legolas	'I shot at him with the bow of Galadriel above Sarn Gebir, and I felled him from the sky. He filled us all with fear. What new terror is this?'
Gandalf	'You only slew his steed. It was a good deed; but the Rider was soon horsed again. For he was a Nazgûl, one of the Nine, who ride now upon winged steeds. Soon their terror will overshadow the last armies of our friends, cutting off the sun. But they have not yet been allowed to cross the River, and Saruman does not know of this new shape in which the Ringwraiths have been clad. His thought is ever on the Ring. Was it present in the battle? Was it found? What if Théoden, Lord of the Mark, should come by it and learn of its power? That is the danger that he sees, and he has fled back to Isengard to double and treble his assault on Rohan. And all the time there is another danger, close at hand, which he does not see, busy with his fiery thoughts. He has forgotten Treebeard.'
Saruman	's double treachery; yet I do not see in what way the coming of two hobbits to Fangorn has served, save to give us a long and fruitless chase.'
Gimli	'There is another thing that I should like to know first. Was it you, Gandalf, or Saruman that we saw last night?'
Gandalf	'therefore I must guess that you saw Saruman. Evidently we look so much alike that your desire to make an incurable dent in my hat must be excused.'
Gimli	'I am glad that it was not you.'
Gandalf	'it is a comfort not to be mistaken at all points. Do I not know it only too well! But, of course, I never blamed you for your welcome of me. How could I do so, who have so often counselled my friends to suspect even their own hands when dealing with the Enemy. Bless you, Gimli, son of Glóin! Maybe you will see us both together one day and judge between us!'
Legolas	'We have come far to seek them, and you seem to know where they are. Where are they now?'
Rohan	'Nay, every Elf in Wilderland has sung songs of the old Onodrim and their long sorrow. Yet even among us they are only a memory. If I were to meet one still walking in this world, then indeed I should feel young again! But Treebeard: that is only a rendering of Fangorn into the Common Speech; yet you seem to speak of a person. Who is this Treebeard?'
Gandalf	'The little that I know of his long slow story would make a tale for which we have no time now. Treebeard is Fangorn, the guardian of the forest; he is the oldest of the Ents, the oldest living thing that still walks beneath the Sun upon this Middle-earth. I hope indeed, Legolas, that you may yet meet him. Merry and Pippin have been fortunate: they met him here, even where we sit. For he came here two days ago and bore them away to his dwelling far off by the roots of the mountains. He often comes here, especially when his mind is uneasy, and rumours of the world outside trouble him. I saw him four days ago striding among the trees, and I think he saw me, for he paused; but I did not speak, for I was heavy with thought, and weary after my struggle with the Eye of Mordor; and he did not speak either, nor call my name.'
Saruman	'But you speak of him as if he was a friend. I thought Fangorn was dangerous.'
Gandalf	'And so am I, very dangerous: more dangerous than anything you will ever meet, unless you are brought alive before the seat of the Dark Lord. And Aragorn is dangerous, and Legolas is dangerous. You are beset with dangers, Gimli son of Glóin; for you are dangerous yourself, in your own fashion. Certainly the forest of Fangorn is perilous-not least to those that are too ready with their axes; and Fangorn himself, he is perilous too; yet he is wise and kindly nonetheless. But now his long slow wrath is brimming over, and all the forest is filled with it. The coming of the hobbits and the tidings that they brought have spilled it: it will soon be running like a flood; but its tide is turned against Saruman and the axes of Isengard. A thing is about to happen which has not happened since the Elder Days: the Ents are going to wake up and find that they are strong.'
Gandalf	'I do not think they know themselves. I wonder.'
Gandalf	'That is not the road that you must take. I have spoken words of hope. But only of hope. Hope is not victory. War is upon us and all our friends, a war in which only the use of the Ring could give us surety of victory. It fills me with great sorrow and great fear: for much shall be destroyed and all may be lost. I am Gandalf, Gandalf the White, but Black is mightier still.'
Arathorn	'Do not regret your choice in the valley of the Emyn Muil, nor call it a vain pursuit. You chose amid doubts the path that seemed right: the choice was just, and it has been rewarded. For so we have met in time, who otherwise might have met too late. But the quest of your companions is over. Your next journey is marked by your given word. You must go to Edoras and seek out Théoden in his hall. For you are needed. The light of Andúril must now be uncovered in the battle for which it has so long waited. There is war in Rohan, and worse evil: it goes ill with Théoden.'
Gandalf	'Who knows? Have patience. Go where you must go, and hope! To Edoras! I go thither also.'
Gandalf	'Will you come now with me?'
Gandalf	'that you could go whithersoever you wished quicker than I? And this I also say: you are our captain and our banner. The Dark Lord has Nine. But we have One, mightier than they: the White Rider. He has passed through the fire and the abyss, and they shall fear him. We will go where he leads.'
Legolas	'But first, it would ease my heart, Gandalf, to hear what befell you in Moria. Will you not tell us? Can you not stay even to tell your friends how you were delivered?'
Gandalf	'Time is short. But if there were a year to spend, I would not tell you all.'
Gimli	'Come, Gandalf, tell us how you fared with the Balrog!'
Gandalf	'Long I fell, and he fell with me. His fire was about me. I was burned. Then we plunged into the deep water and all was dark. Cold it was as the tide of death: almost it froze my heart.'
Durin	's Bridge, and none has measured it,'
Durin	's folk, Gimli son of Glóin. Far, far below the deepest delving of the Dwarves, the world is gnawed by nameless things. Even Sauron knows them not. They are older than he. Now I have walked there, but I will bring no report to darken the light of day. In that despair my enemy was my only hope, and I pursued him, clutching at his heel. Thus he brought me back at last to the secret ways of Khazad-dûm: too well he knew them all. Ever up now we went, until we came to the Endless Stair.'
Gimli	'Many have said that it was never made save in legend, but others say that it was destroyed.'
Gandalf	'From the lowest dungeon to the highest peak it climbed. ascending in unbroken spiral in many thousand steps, until it issued at last in Durin'
Celebdil	' Suddenly Gandalf laughed. '
Legolas	'and little do they mean to those that receive them.'
Legolas	'Would you have her speak openly to you of your death?'
Glóin	" '
Gandalf	's head is now sacred, let us find one that it is right to cleave!'
Gandalf	'Come! We have spent all the time that is allowed to a meeting of parted friends. Now there is need of haste.'
Legolas	'It will be a weary walk!'
Gandalf	'We are too great a burden for one.'
Legolas	'See how they run! There is Hasufel, and there is my friend Arod beside him! But there is another that strides ahead: a very great horse. I have not seen his like before.'
Gandalf	'That is Shadowfax. He is the chief of the Mearas, lords of horses, and not even Théoden, King of Rohan, has ever looked on a better. Does he not shine like silver, and run as smoothly as a swift stream? He has come for me: the horse of the White Rider. We are going to battle together.'
Gandalf	'but you are wise and swift and come at need. Far let us ride now together, and part not in this world again!'
Théoden	'Time presses, so with your leave, my friends, we will ride. We beg you to use all the speed that you can. Hasufel shall bear Aragorn and Arod Legolas. I will set Gimli before me, and by his leave Shadowfax shall bear us both. We will wait now only to drink a little.'
Legolas	'Whether they fled at first in fear, or not, our horses met Shadowfax, their chieftain, and greeted him with joy. Did you know that he was at hand, Gandalf?'
Théoden	'It will be quicker so. The ground is firmer in the Eastemnet, where the chief northward track lies, across the river, but Shadowfax knows the way through every fen and hollow.'
Rohan	'It is now almost due west of us. That way lies Isengard.'
Legolas	'What may that be?'
Gandalf	'Ride on!'
Gandalf	'Tell us what you see there before us!'
Legolas	'Where it issues from the shadow of the vale a green hill rises upon the east. A dike and mighty wall and thorny fence encircle it. Within there rise the roofs of houses; and in the midst, set upon a green terrace, there stands aloft a great hall of Men. And it seems to my eyes that it is thatched with gold. The light of it shines far over the land. Golden, too, are the posts of its doors. There men in bright mail stand; but all else within the courts are yet asleep.'
Théoden	's seat.'
Théoden	'Many long lives of men it is since the golden hall was built.'
Mirkwood	'and but a little while does that seem to us.'
Mark	'that the raising of this house is but a memory of song, and the years before are lost in the mist of time. Now they call this land their home, their own, and their speech is sundered from their northern kin.'
Rohirrim	'for it is like to this land itself; rich and rolling in part, and else hard and stern as the mountains. But I cannot guess what it means, save that it is laden with the sadness of Mortal Men.'
Théoden	'None are welcome here in days of war but our own folk, and those that come from Mundburg in the land of Gondor. Who are you that come heedless over the plain thus strangely clad, riding horses like to our own horses? Long have we kept guard here, and we have watched you from afar. Never have we seen other riders so strange, nor any horse more proud than is one of these that bear you. He is One of the Mearas, unless our eyes are cheated by some spell. Say, are you not a wizard, some spy from Saruman, or phantoms of his craft? Speak now and be swift!'
Éomer	'If what you tell me is truth, then doubtless Théoden will have heard of it. Maybe your coming was not wholly unlooked-for. It is but two nights ago that Wormtongue came to us and said that by the will of Théoden no stranger should pass these gates.'
Wormtongue	'Say no more! My errand is not to Wormtongue, but to the Lord of the Mark himself. I am in haste. Will you not go or send to say that we are come?'
Shadowfax	'Théoden gives you leave to enter; but any weapon that you bear; be it only a staff, you must leave on the threshold. The doorwardens will keep them.'
Théoden	'Háma is my name. Here I must bid you lay aside your weapons before you enter.'
Legolas	'for they come from the Golden Wood and the Lady of Lothlórien gave them to me.'
Elendil	's heir of Gondor.'
Théoden	's demand, but it is useless to refuse. A king will have his way in his own hall, be it folly or wisdom.'
Háma	'here you shall lay it, if you would not fight alone against all the men in Edoras.'
Gimli	'Not alone!'
Gandalf	'We are all friends here. Or should be; for the laughter of Mordor will be our only reward, if we quarrel. My errand is pressing. Here at least is my sword, goodman Háma. Keep it well. Glamdring it is called, for the Elves made it long ago. Now let me pass. Come, Aragorn!'
Elendil	's heir.'
Andúril	'Now then, if all is as you wish, let us go and speak with your master.'
Gandalf	'Forgive me, but that too must be left at the doors.'
Gandalf	'Prudence is one thing, but discourtesy is another. I am old. If I may not lean on my stick as I go, then I will sit out here, until it pleases Théoden to hobble out himself to speak with me.'
Háma	'Yet in doubt a man of worth will trust to his own wisdom. I believe you are friends and folk worthy of honour, who have no evil purpose. You may go in.'
Young	'Thus he rode out of the North to the Battle of the Field of Celebrant.'
Gandalf	'Hail, Théoden son of Thengel! I have returned. For behold! the storm comes, and now all friends should gather together, lest each singly be destroyed.'
Wormtongue	'Yet in two ways may a man come with evil tidings. lie may be a worker of evil; or he may be such as leaves well alone, and comes only to bring aid in time of need.'
Wormtongue	's sorrows, carrion-fowl that grow fat on war. What aid have you ever brought, Stormcrow? And what aid do you bring now? It was aid from us that you sought last time that you were here. Then my lord bade you Choose any horse that you would and be gone; and to the wonder of all you took Shadowfax in your insolence. My lord was sorely grieved; yet to some it seemed that to speed you from the land the price was not too great. I guess that it is likely to turn out the same once more: you will seek aid rather than render it. Do you bring men? Do you bring horses, swords, spears? That I would call aid; that is our present need. But who are these that follow at your tail? Three ragged wanderers in grey, and you yourself the most beggar-like of the four!'
Théoden	'Has not the messenger from your gate reported the names of my companions? Seldom has any lord of Rohan received three such guests. Weapons they have laid at your doors that are worth many a mortal man, even the mightiest. Grey is their raiment, for the Elves clad them, and thus they have passed through the shadow of great perils to your hall.'
Wormtongue	'It is not to be wondered at: webs of deceit were ever woven in Dwimordene.'
Gandalf	'The wise speak only of what they know, Gríma son of Gálmód. A witless worm have you become. Therefore be silent, and keep your forked tongue behind your teeth. I have not passed through fire and death to bandy crooked words with a serving-man till the lightning falls.'
Wormtongue	'Did I not counsel you, lord, to forbid his staff? That fool, Háma, has betrayed us!'
Théoden	'Not all is dark. Take courage, Lord of the Mark; for better help you will not find. No counsel have I to give to those that despair. Yet counsel I could give, and words I could speak to you. Will you hear them? They are not for all ears. I bid you come out before your doors and look abroad. Too long have you sat in shadows and trusted to twisted tales and crooked promptings.'
Gandalf	'And you, lady, leave him a while with me. I will care for him.'
Éowyn	'The time for fear is past.'
Gandalf	'look out upon your land! Breathe the free air again!'
Gandalf	'Nor does age lie so heavily on your shoulders as some would have you think. Cast aside your prop!'
Gandalf	'But first send for Éomer. Do I not guess rightly that you hold him prisoner, by the counsel of Gríma, of him that all save you name the Wormtongue?'
Théoden	'He had rebelled against my commands, and threatened death to Gríma in my hall.'
Gandalf	'Yet if my hope is not cheated, a time will come ere long when I can speak more fully. Behold! you are come into a peril greater even than the wit of Wormtongue could weave into your dreams. But see! you dream no longer. You live. Gondor and Rohan do not stand alone. The enemy is strong beyond our reckoning, yet we have a hope at which he has not guessed.'
Gandalf	'that way lies our hope, where sits our greatest fear. Doom hangs still on a thread. Yet hope there is still, if we can but stand unconquered for a little while.'
Théoden	'that these evil days should be mine, and should come in my old age instead of that peace which I have earned. Alas for Boromir the brave! The young perish and the old linger, withering.'
Théoden	'Where has Gríma stowed it?'
Éomer	'It is a joy to us to see you return into your own. Never again shall it be said, Gandalf, that you come only with grief!'
Éomer	'Go, Háma, and seek my own sword! Gríma has it in his keeping. Bring him to me also. Now, Gandalf, you said that you had counsel to give, if I would hear it. What is your counsel?'
Gandalf	'To put your trust in Éomer, rather than in a man of crooked mind. To cast aside regret and fear. To do the deed at hand. Every man that can ride should be sent west at once, as Éomer counselled you: we must first destroy the threat of Saruman, while we have time. If we fail, we fall. If we succeed - then we will face the next task. Meanwhile your people that are left, the women and the children and the old, should stay to the refuges that you have in the mountains. Were they not prepared against just such an evil day as this? Let them take provision, but delay not, nor burden themselves with treasures, great or small. It is their lives that are at stake.'
Théoden	'Let all my folk get ready! But you my guests-truly you said, Gandalf, that the courtesy of my hall is lessened. You have ridden through the night, and the morning wears away. You have had neither sleep nor food. A guest-house shall be made ready: there you shall sleep, when you have eaten.'
Gandalf	'But Isengard is strong. And other perils draw ever nearer. Do not delay, Théoden, when we are gone. Lead your people swiftly to the Hold of Dunharrow in the hills!'
Gandalf	'You do not know your own skill in healing. It shall not be so. I myself will go to war, to fall in the front of the battle, if it must be. Thus shall I sleep better.'
Rohan	'The Lord of the Mark will ride! Forth Eorlingas!'
Gandalf	'Who shall guide them and govern them in your place?'
Théoden	'Here comes my counsellor.'
Wormtongue	'It was found in his chest. Loth was he to render up the keys. Many other things are there which men have missed.'
Wormtongue	'And this sword your master himself gave into my keeping.'
Théoden	'Does that displease you?'
Wormtongue	'I care for you and yours as best I may. But do not weary yourself, or tax too heavily your strength. Let others deal with these irksome guests. Your meat is about to be set on the board. Will you not go to it?'
Théoden	'And let food for my guests be set on the board beside me. The host rides today. Send the heralds forth! Let them summon all who dwell nigh! Every man and strong lad able to bear arms, all who have horses, let them be ready in the saddle at the gate ere the second hour from noon!'
Wormtongue	'It is as I feared. This wizard has bewitched you. Are none to be left to defend the Golden Hall of your fathers, and all your treasure? None to guard the Lord of the Mark?'
Théoden	'it seems to me more wholesome than your whisperings. Your leechcraft ere long would have had me walking on all fours like a beast. No, not one shall be left, not even Gríma. Gríma shall ride too. Go! You have yet time to clean the rust from your sword.'
Wormtongue	'Have pity on one worn out in your service. Send me not from your side! I at least will stand by you when all others have gone. Do not send your faithful Gríma away!'
Théoden	'And I do not send you from my side. I go myself to war with my men. I bid you come with me and prove your faith.'
Wormtongue	'But those who truly love him would spare his failing years. Yet I see that I come too late. Others, whom the death of my lord would perhaps grieve less, have already persuaded him. If I cannot undo their work, hear me at least in this, lord! One who knows your mind and honours your commands should be left in Edoras. Appoint a faithful steward. Let your counsellor Gríma keep all things till your return-and I pray that we may see it, though no wise man will deem it hopeful.'
Wormtongue	' he said, what office of less honour would you accept? To carry a sack of meal up into the mountains-if any man would trust you with it?'
Wormtongue	'Down on your belly! How long is it since Saruman bought you? What was the promised price? When all the men were dead, you were to pick your share of the treasure, and take the woman you desire? Too long have you watched her under your eyelids and haunted her steps.'
Éomer	'For that reason I would have slain him before, forgetting the law of the hall. But there are other reasons.'
Éowyn	'But you, Wormtongue, you have done what you could for your true master. Some reward you have earned at least. Yet Saruman is apt to overlook his bargains. I should advise you to go quickly and remind him, lest he forget your faithful service.'
Gandalf	'I do not lie. See, Théoden, here is a snake! With safety you cannot take it with you, nor can you leave it behind. To slay it would be just. But it was not always as it now is. Once it was a man, and did you service in its fashion. Give him a horse and let him go at once, wherever he chooses. By his choice you shall judge him.'
Wormtongue	'This is your choice: to ride with me to war, and let us see in battle whether you are true; or to go now, whither you will. But then, if ever we meet again, I shall not be merciful.'
Wormtongue	's face and opened his mouth as if to speak. Then suddenly he drew himself up. His hands worked. His eyes glittered. Such malice was in them that men stepped back from him. He bared his teeth; and then with a hissing breath he spat before the king'
Théoden	'See that he does no harm to any, but do not hurt him or hinder him. Give him a horse, if he wishes it.'
Théoden	'Come and take such refreshment as haste allows.'
Wormtongue	's task was easy, and all that you did was swiftly known in Isengard; for your land was open, and strangers came and went. And ever Wormtongue'
Wormtongue	's voice speaking with your mouth, those Orcs would have reached Isengard by now, bearing a great prize. Not indeed that prize which Saruman desires above all else, but at the least two members of my Company, sharers of a secret hope, of which even to you, lord, I cannot yet speak openly. Dare you think of what they might now be suffering, or what Saruman might now have learned to our destruction?'
Éomer	'that to crooked eyes truth may wear a wry face.'
Théoden	'Most of all I owe to you, my guest. Once again you have come in time. I would give you a gift ere we go, at your own choosing. You have only to name aught that is mine. I reserve now only my sword!'
Gandalf	'But as for your gift, lord, I will choose one that will fit my need: swift and sure. Give me Shadowfax! He was only lent before, if loan we may call it. But now shall ride him into great hazard, setting silver against black: I would not risk anything that is not my own. And already there is a bond of love between us.'
Théoden	'and I give him now gladly. Yet it is a great gift. There is none like to Shadowfax. In him one of the mighty steeds of old has returned. None such shall return again. And to you my other guests I will offer such things as may be found in my armoury. Swords you do not need, but there are helms and coats of mail of cunning work, gifts to my fathers out of Gondor. Choose from these ere we go, and may they serve you well!'
Théoden	's day, while still I was a boy.'
Mark	'Indeed sooner would I bear a horse than be borne by one. I love my feet better. But, maybe, I shall come yet where I can stand and fight.'
Éowyn	'Receive now this cup and drink in happy hour. Health be with thee at thy going and coming!'
Théoden	'Hail Lady of Rohan!'
Théoden	'I have no child. Théodred my son is slain. I name Éomer my sister-son to be my heir. If neither of us return, then choose a new lord as you will. But to some one I must now entrust my people that I leave behind, to rule them in my place. Which of you will stay?'
Éomer	'and he is the last of that House.'
Éomer	'And he is not the last. There is Éowyn, daughter of Éomund, his sister. She is fearless and high-hearted. All love her. Let her be as lord to the Eorlingas, while we are gone.'
Théoden	'Let the heralds announce to the folk that the Lady Éowyn will lead them!'
Éowyn	'A year shall I endure for every day that passes until your return.'
Gandalf	's saddlebow.'
Legolas	'Yet doubtless Gandalf will gladly put you down on your feet when blows begin; or Shadowfax himself. An axe is no weapon for a rider.'
Glóin	'I have not had time to learn gentle speech under your rod, as you promised. But shall we not put aside our quarrel? At least I will speak no evil again of the Lady of the Wood.'
Éomer	'But until that time pardon me, and in token of pardon ride with me, I beg. Gandalf will be at the head with the Lord of the Mark; but Firefoot, my horse, will bear us both, if you will.'
Gimli	'I will gladly go with you, if Legolas, my comrade, may ride beside us.'
Éomer	'Legolas upon my left, and Aragorn upon my right, and none will dare to stand before us!'
Théoden	'But hearken all! Here now I name my guest, Gandalf Greyhame, wisest of counsellors; most welcome of wanderers, a lord of the Mark, a chieftain of the Eorlingas while our kin shall last; and I give to him Shadowfax, prince of horses.'
Éomer	'and they can tell a sparrow from a finch a league off. Tell me, can you sec anything away yonder towards Isengard?'
Legolas	'I can see a darkness. There are shapes moving in it, great shapes far away upon the bank of the river; but what they are I cannot tell. It is not mist or cloud that defeats my eyes: there is a veiling shadow that some power lays upon the land, and it marches slowly down stream. It is as if the twilight under endless trees were flowing downwards from the hills.'
Gandalf	'It will be a black night.'
Éomer	'You come at last, but too late, and with too little strength. Things have gone evilly since Théodred fell. We were driven back yesterday over the Isen with great loss; many perished at the crossing. Then at night fresh forces came over the river against our camp. All Isengard must be emptied; and Saruman has armed the wild hillmen and herd-folk of Dunland beyond the rivers, and these also he loosed upon us. We were overmastered. The shield-wall was broken. Erkenbrand of Westfold has drawn off those men he could gather towards his fastness in Helm'
Isengard	'I am here. The last host of the Eorlingas has ridden forth. It will not return without battle.'
Théoden	'Give this man a fresh horse! Let us ride to the help of Erkenbrand!'
Éomer	's Gate! Farewell!'
Gandalf Greyhame	'Ever he goes and comes unlooked-for:'
Háma	'but for myself, I will wait until I see Gandalf again.'
gore	's Dike. Thence it fell into the Deeping-coomb and out into the Westfold Vale. There in the Hornburg at Helm'
Erkenbrand	's Gate, if he has not already perished.'
Wormtongue	's Gate, whether Erkenbrand be there or no. Is it known how great is the host that comes from the North?'
Éomer	'Let us drive through such foes as are already between us and the fastness. There are caves in Helm'
Éomer	's host will be known to the leader of our enemies, Saruman or whatever captain he has sent forth.'
Théoden	'and they are burning as they come, rick, cot, and tree. This was a rich vale and had many homesteads. Alas for my folk!'
Éomer	's Gate. There we can turn and give battle.'
Théoden	'It is a mile long or more, and the breach in it is wide.'
Éomer	'I, Éomer son of Éomund, speak.'
Gamling	's son here. What news of Erkenbrand? Word came yesterday that he was retreating hither with all that is left of the best Riders of Westfold. But he has not come.'
Éomer	'Our scouts have gained no news of him, and the enemy fills all the valley behind us.'
Théoden	'He was a mighty man. In him lived again the valour of Helm the Hammerhand. But we cannot await him here. We must draw all our forces now behind the walls. Are you well stored? We bring little provision, for we rode forth to open battle, not to a siege.'
Gamling	'But great store of food, and many beasts and their fodder, have also been gathered there.'
Éomer	'They are burning or despoiling all that is left in the vale.'
Helm	's Gate, they will pay a high price,'
Legolas	'But you are a dwarf, and dwarves are strange folk. I do not like this place, and I shall like it no more by the light of day. But you comfort me, Gimli, and I am glad to have you standing nigh with your stout legs and your hard axe. I wish there were more of your kin among us. But even more would I give for a hundred good archers of Mirkwood. We shall need them. The Rohirrim have good bowmen after their fashion, but there are too few here, too few.'
Gimli	'Indeed it is time for sleep. Sleep! I feel the need of it, as never I thought any dwarf could. Riding is tiring work. Yet my axe is restless in my hand. Give me a row of orc-necks and room to swing and all weariness will fall from me!'
Éomer	'Gúthwinë for the Mark!'
Andúril	'Andúril for the Dúnedain!'
Andúril	'Andúril! Andúril goes to war. The Blade that was Broken shines again!'
Éomer	'Come! We must get back and see what we can do to pile stone and beam across the gates within. Come now!'
Éomer	'I did not know that you were with us in the sortie. But oft the unbidden guest proves the best company. How came you there?'
Gimli	'but I looked on the hillmen and they seemed over large for me, so I sat beside a stone to see your sword-play.'
Legolas	'I have done better, though now I must grope for spent arrows; all mine are gone. Yet I make my tale twenty at the least. But that is only a few leaves in a forest.'
Gimli	'Khazâd! Khazâd!'
Gamling	' he cried. '
Gimli	'Now my count passes Master Legolas again.'
Gamling	'Dwarves are said to be cunning folk with stone. Lend us your aid, master!'
Gimli	'But I will help as I may.'
Gimli	'Come, Gamling, let us see how things go on the wall!'
Legolas	'But my count is now two dozen. It has been knife-work up here.'
Gamling	'But dawn will not help us, I fear.'
Isengard	'And neither will the wild men of the hills. Do you not hear their voices?'
Éomer	'but they are only the scream of birds and the bellowing of beasts to my ears.'
Gamling	' Such names they have for us. Not in half a thousand years have they forgotten their grievance that the lords of Gondor gave the Mark to Eorl the Young and made alliance with him. That old hatred Saruman has inflamed. They are fierce folk when roused. They will not give way now for dusk or dawn, until Théoden is taken, or they themselves are slain.'
Saruman	'They have crept in the culvert again, while we talked, and they have lit the fire of Orthanc beneath our feet. Elendil, Elendil!'
Legolas	'but not yet hopeless, while we have you with us. Where is Gimli?'
Legolas	'But I wish that he had come this way. I desired to tell Master Gimli that my tale is now thirty-nine.'
Legolas	'Would that this night would end, and I could have better light for shooting.'
Théoden	'If I could have set a spear in rest, riding before my men upon the field, maybe I could have felt again the joy of battle, and so ended. But I serve little purpose here.'
Mark	'More hope we have to defend you in the Hornburg than in Edoras, or even at Dunharrow in the mountains.'
Théoden	'but now my heart is doubtful. The world changes, and all that once was strong now proves unsure. How shall any tower withstand such numbers and such reckless hate? Had I known that the strength of Isengard was grown so great, maybe l should not so rashly have ridden forth to meet it, for all the arts of Gandalf. His counsel seems not now so good as it did under the morning sun.'
Hasufel	's horn, and I will ride forth. Will you ride with me then, son of Arathorn? Maybe we shall cleave a road, or make such an end as will be worth a song-if any be left to sing of us hereafter.'
Helm	'Helm is arisen and comes back to war. Helm for Théoden King!'
Saruman	's Gate until all above the Dike was empty of them, but below it they were packed like swarming flies. Vainly they crawled and clambered about the walls of the coomb. seeking to escape. Upon the east too sheer and stony was the valley'
Erkenbrand	'Erkenbrand!'
Mithrandir	'This is wizardry indeed! Come! I would look on this forest, ere the spell changes.'
Legolas	'Alas! My axe is notched: the forty-second had an iron collar on his neck. How is it with you?'
Legolas	'But I do not grudge you the game, so glad am I to see you on your legs!'
Éomer	'Now that I see you safe, I am glad indeed.'
Éomer	'Once more you come in the hour of need, unlooked-for,'
Gandalf	'I said that I would return and meet you here.'
Gandalf	'Nay, I see the wood as plainly as do you. But that is no deed of mine. It is a thing beyond the counsel of the wise. Better than my design, and better even than my hope the event has proved.'
Théoden	's, that is plain. Is there some mightier sage, of whom we have yet to learn?'
Gandalf	'I shall return to Isengard, and those who will may come with me. There we may see strange things.'
Isengard	'I shall not stay there long. My way lies now eastward. Look for me in Edoras, ere the waning of the moon!'
Théoden	'In the dark hour before dawn I doubted, but we will not part now. I will come with you, if that is your counsel.'
Gandalf	'and since he has done you great injury, it would be fitting if you were there. But how soon and how swiftly will you ride?'
Gandalf	'We will journey under the shadow of evening. It is as well; for it is my counsel that all our comings and goings should be as secret as may be, henceforth. But do not command many men to go with you, Théoden. We go to a parley not to a fight.'
Erkenbrand	'and afterwards you shall take an oath never again to pass the Fords of Isen in arms, nor to march with the enemies of Men; and then you shall go free back to your land. For you have been deluded by Saruman. Many of you have got death as the reward of your trust in him; but had you conquered, little better would your wages have been.'
Gandalf	'The morning may bring new counsel.'
Théoden	'and I will remember it, when we meet.'
Gandalf	'I feel a great wrath about me. Do you not feel the air throb in your ears?'
Gimli	'Let us leave them! I guess their thought already: hatred of all that go on two legs; and their speech is of crushing and strangling.'
Legolas	'There I think you are wrong. It is Orcs that they hate. For they do not belong here and know little of Elves and Men. Far away are the valleys where they sprang. From the deep dales of Fangorn, Gimli, that is whence they come, I guess.'
North	's Deep are vast and beautiful? There would be an endless pilgrimage of Dwarves, merely to gaze at them, if such things were known to be. Aye indeed, they would pay pure gold for a brief glance!'
Legolas	'and double to be let out, if I strayed in!'
Legolas	's Deep! Happy was the chance that drove me there! It makes me weep to leave them.'
Gimli	'that you may come safe from war and return to see them again. But do not tell all your kindred! There seems little left for them to do, from your account. Maybe the men of this land are wise to say little: one family of busy dwarves with hammer and chisel might mar more than they made.'
Durin	's race would mine those caves for stones or ore, not if diamonds and gold could be got there. Do you cut down groves of blossoming trees in the spring-time for firewood? We would tend these glades of flowering stone, not quarry them. With cautious skill, tap by tap - a small chip of rock and no more, perhaps, in a whole anxious day - so we could work, and as the years went by, we should open up new ways, and display far chambers that are still dark, glimpsed only as a void beyond fissures in the rock. And lights, Legolas! We should make lights, such lamps as once shone in Khazad-dûm; and when we wished we would drive away the night that has lain there since the hills were made; and when we desired rest, we would let the night return.'
Fangorn	's Deep.'
Gimli	'But I will endure Fangorn, if I have your promise to come back to the caves and share their wonder with me.'
Legolas	'But alas! Now we must leave behind both cave and wood for a while: See! We are coming to the end of the trees. How far is it to Isengard, Gandalf?'
Gandalf	'five from the mouth of Deeping-coomb to the Fords: and ten more from there to the gates of Isengard. But we shall not ride all the way this night.'
Gimli	'You may know, but I cannot guess.'
Legolas Greenleaf	'Do not go back into the wood, not yet! Now is not your time.'
Gandalf	'These are but herdsmen. They are not enemies, indeed they are not concerned with us at all.'
Théoden	'Where are their flocks? What are they, Gandalf? For it is plain that to you, at any rate, they are not strange.'
Gandalf	'Is it so long since you listened to tales by the fireside? There are children in your land who, out of the twisted threads of story, could pick the answer to your question. You have seen Ents, O King, Ents out of Fangorn Forest, which in your tongue you call the Entwood. Did you think that the name was given only in idle fancy? Nay, Théoden, it is otherwise: to them you are but the passing tale; all the years from Eorl the Young to Théoden the Old are of little count to them; and all the deeds of your house but a small matter.'
Théoden	'For not only the little life of Men is now endangered, but the life also of those things which you have deemed the matter of legend. You are not without allies, even if you know them not.'
Théoden	'For however the fortune of war shall go, may it not so end that much that was fair and wonderful shall pass for ever out of Middle-earth?'
Gandalf	'The evil of Sauron cannot be wholly cured, nor made as if it had not been. But to such days we are doomed. Let us now go on with the journey we have begun!'
Éomer	'So it would seem,'
Théoden	'Must we pass this way, where the carrion-beasts devour so many good Riders of the Mark?'
Gandalf	'Grievous is the fall of your men; but you shall see that at least the wolves of the mountains do not devour them. It is with their friends, the Orcs, that they hold their feast: such indeed is the friendship of their kind. Come!'
Gandalf	'Friends have laboured here.'
Éomer	'And when their spears have rotted and rusted, long still may their mound stand and guard the Fords of Isen!'
Théoden	'You accomplished much in an evening and a night!'
Shadowfax	's Deep: the lands seemed empty of enemies; yet I feared that wolf-riders and plunderers might ride nonetheless to Meduseld, while it was undefended. But now I think you need not fear: you will find your house to welcome your return.'
Théoden	'though brief now, I doubt not, shall be my abiding there.'
Gandalf	's Vale was burning.'
Éomer	'but I have never seen aught like this before. These are steams rather than smokes. Saruman is brewing some devilry to greet us. Maybe he is boiling all the waters of Isen, and that is why the river runs dry.'
Gandalf	'Tomorrow we shall learn what he is doing. Now let us rest for a while, if we can.'
Gandalf	'Draw no weapons! Wait! and it will pass you by!'
Isengard	's model or a slave'
Isengard	'is Peregrin, son of Paladin, of the house of Took. Far in the North is our home. The Lord Saruman is within; but at the moment he is closeted with one Wormtongue, or doubtless he would be here to welcome such honourable guests.'
Gandalf	'And was it Saruman that ordered you to guard his damaged doors, and watch for the arrival of guests, when your attention could be spared from plate and bottle?'
Merry	'He has been much occupied. Our orders came from Treebeard, who has taken over the management of Isengard. He commanded me to welcome the Lord of Rohan with fitting words. I have done my best.'
Legolas	'You rascals, you woolly-footed and wool-pated truants! A fine hunt you have led us! Two hundred leagues, through fen and forest, battle and death, to rescue you! And here we find you feasting and idling-and smoking! Smoking! Where did you come by the weed, you villains? Hammer and tongs! I am so torn between rage and joy, that if I do not burst. it will be a marvel!'
Legolas	'Though I would sooner learn how they came by the wine.'
Pippin	'Here you find us sitting on a field of victory, amid the plunder of armies, and you wonder how we came by a few well-earned comforts!'
Gimli	'I cannot believe that!'
Théoden	'So these are the lost ones of your company, Gandalf? The days are fated to be filled with marvels. Already I have seen many since I left my house; and now here before my eyes stand yet another of the folk of legend. Are not these the Halflings, that some among us call the Holbytlan?'
Théoden	'Your tongue is strangely changed; but the name sounds not unfitting so. Hobbits! No report that I have heard does justice to the truth.'
Merry	'And here is another marvel! I have wandered in many lands, since I left my home, and never till now have I found people that knew any story concerning hobbits.'
Théoden	'But I will not deceive you: we know no tales about hobbits. All that is said among us is that far away, over many hills and rivers, live the halfling folk that dwell in holes in sand-dunes. But there are no legends of their deeds. for it is said that they do little, and avoid the sight of men, being able to vanish in a twinkling: and they can change their voices to resemble the piping of birds. But it seems that more could be said.'
Théoden	'I had not heard that they spouted smoke from their mouths.'
Merry	'for it is an art which we have not practised for more than a few generations. It was Tobold Hornblower, of Longbottom in the Southfarthing, who first grew the true pipe-weed in his gardens, about the year 1070 according to our reckoning. How old Toby came by the plant…'
Théoden	'These hobbits will sit on the edge of ruin and discuss the pleasures of the table, or the small doings of their fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers, and remoter cousins to the ninth degree, if you encourage them with undue patience. Some other time would be more fitting for the history of smoking. Where is Treebeard, Merry?'
Merry	's planting. Quickbeam, I think, is by the rock, near the foot of the stair.'
Legolas	'but his arms are at his sides, and he stands as still as a door-tree.'
Gandalf	'and we at any rate have not eaten since early morning. Yet I wish to see Treebeard as soon as may be. Did he leave me no message, or has plate and bottle driven it from your mind?'
Merry	'and I was coming to it, but I have been hindered by many other questions. I was to say that, if the Lord of the Mark and Gandalf will ride to the northern wall they will find Treebeard there, and he will welcome them. I may add that they will also find food of the best there, it was discovered and selected by your humble servants.'
Gandalf	'Well, Théoden. will you ride with me to find Treebeard? We must go round about, but it is not far. When you see Treebeard, you will learn much. For Treebeard is Fangorn, and the eldest and chief of the Ents, and when you speak with him you will hear the speech of the oldest of all living things.'
Théoden	'Farewell, my hobbits! May we meet again in my house! There you shall sit beside me and tell me all that your hearts desire: the deeds of your grandsires, as far as you can reckon them; and we will speak also of Tobold the Old and his herb-lore. Farewell!'
Rohan	'A fine old fellow. Very polite.'
Legolas	'the hunters can perhaps learn the answers to their own small riddles. We tracked you as far as the forest, but there are still many things that I should like to know the truth of.'
Merry	'We have learnt a few things through Treebeard, the Old Ent, but that is not nearly enough.'
Legolas	'We were the hunters, and you should give an account of yourselves to us first.'
Gimli	'It would go better after a meal. t have a sore head; and it is past mid-day. You truants might make amends by finding us some of the plunder that you spoke of. Food and drink would pay off some of my score against you.'
Pippin	's guard-house--over there under the arch? We had to picnic out here, so as to keep an eye on the road.'
Gimli	' meat or anything that they have mauled.'
Merry	'We have had enough of Orcs ourselves to last a life-time. But there were many other folk in Isengard. Saruman kept enough wisdom not to trust his Orcs. He had Men to guard his gates: some of his most faithful servants, I suppose. Anyway they were favoured and got good provisions.'
Merry	'But that is another story, which can wait until after lunch.'
Pippin	'It cheered us up in the fogs. There were few faggots about, and most of the wood we could find was wet. But there is a great draught in the chimney: it seems to wind away up through the rock, and fortunately it has not been blocked. A fire is handy. I will make you some toast. The bread is three or four days old, I am afraid.'
Merry	's a barrel inside there - very passable. And this is first-rate salted pork. Or I can cut you some rashers of bacon and broil them, if you like. I am sorry there is no green stuff: the deliveries have been rather interrupted in the last few days! I cannot offer you anything to follow but butter and honey for your bread. Are you content?'
Gimli	'The score is much reduced.'
Legolas	'But maybe. if we had not arrived, you would already have been keeping one another company again.'
Pippin	's content.'
Gimli	'Why, your hair is twice as thick and curly as when we parted; and I would swear that you have both grown somewhat, if that is possible for hobbits of your age. This Treebeard at any rate has not starved you.'
Merry	's draughts may be nourishing, but one feels the need of something solid. And even lembas is none the worse for a change.'
Legolas	's eyes do not deceive him. Strange songs have been sung of the draughts of Fangorn.'
Pippin	'you have seen some at a distance, already-they saw you at any rate, and reported that you were on the way-and you will see many others, I expect, before you leave here. You must form your own ideas.'
Gimli	'We are beginning the story in the middle. I should like a tale in the right order, starting with that strange day when our fellowship was broken.'
Merry	'But first-if you have finished eating-you shall fill your pipes and light up. And then for a little while we can pretend that we are all back safe at Bree again, or in Rivendell.'
Gimli	'It feels good, and it smells good,'
Merry	's private use. I fancy. I never knew that it went so far abroad. But it comes in handy now?'
Gimli	'if I had a pipe to go with it. Alas, I lost mine in Moria, or before. Is there no pipe in all your plunder?'
Merry	't think it would be any use knocking on the doors of Orthanc to beg a pipe of him! We shall have to share pipes. as good friends must at a pinch.'
Pippin	'Most noble hobbit, it leaves me deep in your debt.'
Pippin	'Strider the Ranger has come back!'
Legolas	'Time wears on, and the mists are blowing away, or would if you strange folk did not wreathe yourselves in smoke. What of the tale?'
Pippin	'Let me see, what is today?'
Merry	' With that he plunged into an account of Boromir'
Merry	'I never expected to see those again! I marked a few orcs with mine; but Uglúk took them from us. How he glared! At first I thought he was going to stab me, but he threw the things away as if they burned him.'
Pippin	'I have kept it safe, for it is a very precious thing.'
Pippin	'It was a wrench to let it go; but what else could I do?'
Gimli	'Luck served you there; but you seized your chance with both hands, one might say.'
Legolas	'I wondered if you had grown wings!'
Grishnákh	' He shuddered and said no more, leaving Merry to tell of those last horrible moments: the pawing hands, the hot breath, and the dreadful strength of Grishnákh'
Lugbúrz	'The Dark Lord already knew too much and his servants also; and Grishnákh evidently sent some message across the River after the quarrel. The Red Eye will be looking towards Isengard. But Saruman at any rate is in a cleft stick of his own cutting.'
Merry	'Things began to go all wrong for him from the moment his Orcs set foot in Rohan.'
Gandalf	'On the edge of the Forest.'
Merry	'five nights ago-now we come to a part of the story you know nothing about. We met Treebeard that morning after the battle; and that night we were at Wellinghall, one of his ent-houses. The next morning we went to Entmoot, a gathering of Ents, that is, and the queerest thing I have ever seen in my life. It lasted all that day and the next; and we spent the nights with an Ent called Quickbeam. And then late in the afternoon in the third day of their moot, the Ents suddenly blew up. It was amazing. The Forest had felt as tense as if a thunderstorm was brewing inside it: then all at once it exploded. I wish you could have heard their song as they marched.'
Nan Curunír	' Merry continued. '
Huorns	". Treebeard won'
Isengard	't know much about this war, or about the Horsemen of Rohan, but Saruman seems to have meant to finish off the king and all his men with one final blow. He emptied Isengard. I saw the enemy go: endless lines of marching Orcs; and troops of them mounted on great wolves. And there were battalions of Men, too. Many of them carried torches, and in the flare I could see their faces. Most of them were ordinary men, rather tall and dark-haired, and grim but not particularly evil-looking. But there were some others that were horrible: man-high, but with goblin-faces, sallow, leering, squint-eyed. Do you know, they reminded me at once of that Southerner at Bree: only he was not so obviously orc-like as most of these were.'
Saruman	's; but whether he was working with the Black Riders, or for Saruman alone, I do not know. It is difficult with these evil folk to know when they are in league, and when they are cheating one another.'
Merry	'My business is with Isengard tonight, with rock and stone.'
Pippin	'He seems at one time to have got round them, but never again. And anyway he did not understand them; and he made the great mistake of leaving them out of his calculations. He had no plan for them, and there was no time to make any, once they had set to work. As soon as our attack began, the few remaining rats in Isengard started bolting through every hole that the Ents made. The Ents let the Men go, after they had questioned them, two or three dozen only down at this end. I don'
Quickbeam	"The tree-killer, the tree-killer!"
Merry	's. Anyway they could not get a grip on it, or make a crack in it; and they were bruising and wounding themselves against it. '
Merry	's face clearly: it seemed to shine, and all his clothes were white. I just sat up, staring, with my mouth open. I tried to call out, and couldn'
Pippin	"Get up, you tom-fool of a Took! Where, in the name of wonder, in all this ruin is Treebeard? I want him. Quick!"
Gandalf	" is his motto; but nobody, not even Elves, will say much about Gandalf'
Hoom	"I am glad you have come. Wood and water, stock and stone, I can master; but there is a Wizard to manage here."
Gandalf	"I need your help. You have done much, but I need more. I have about ten thousand Orcs to manage."
Gandalf	"where have you been? And have you seen the others?"
Gandalf	"Yes, I have seen some of the others. But news must wait. This is a perilous night, and I must ride fast. But the dawn may be brighter; and if so, we shall meet again. Take care of yourselves, and keep away from Orthanc! Good-bye!"
Gandalf	"Hm, well, I find you are not such hasty folk as I thought. You said much less than you might, and not more than you should. Hm, this is a bundle of news and no mistake! Well, now Treebeard must get busy again."
Nan Curunír	'We feared that Saruman was brewing some new devilry for us.'
Huorns	't know. It was a misty, moisty morning when we climbed down and looked round again, and nobody was about. And that is about all there is to tell. It seems almost peaceful now after all the turmoil. And safer too, somehow, since Gandalf came back. I could sleep!'
Gimli	'Wormtongue. You told Théoden he was with Saruman. How did he get there?'
Huorns	"No more Orcs in Isengard, no more axes! And there will be folk coming up from the South before the day is old; some that you may be glad to see."
Wormtongue	"Gandalf got here first. So I know as much about you as I need, and I know what to do with you. Put all the rats in one trap, said Gandalf; and I will. I am the master of Isengard now, but Saruman is locked in his tower; and you can go there and give him all the messages that you can think of."
Wormtongue	"I know the way."
Wormtongue	's counsellor?'
Saruman	's spy and servant in Rohan. Fate has not been kinder to him than he deserves. The sight of the ruin of all that he thought so strong and magnificent must have been almost punishment enough. But I fear that worse awaits him.'
Horn	" said Pippin; that is how the situation arose.'
Wormtongue	's. Was there a date on the barrels?'
Pippin	's; no, the year before, of course, now: a good year.'
Merry	'The afternoon is getting on. Let us go and look round! You can enter Isengard now at any rate, Strider, if you want to. But it is not a very cheerful sight.'
Théoden	'Let us go and meet them!'
Merry	't take care.'
Merry	'But our discussions began and ended in smoke. Still we feel less ill-disposed towards Saruman than we did.'
Gandalf	'Well, I do not. I have now a last task to do before I go: I must pay Saruman a farewell visit. Dangerous, and probably useless; but it must be done. Those of you who wish may come with me - but beware! And do not jest! This is not the time for it.'
Gimli	'I wish to see him and learn if he really looks like you.'
Gandalf	'Saruman could look like me in your eyes, if it suited his purpose with you. And are you yet wise enough to detect all his counterfeits? Well, we shall see, perhaps. He may be shy of showing himself before many different eyes together. But I have ordered all the Ents to remove themselves from sight, so perhaps we shall persuade him to come out.'
Pippin	'Will he shoot at us, and pour fire out of the windows; or can he put a spell on us from a distance?'
Gandalf	'But there is no knowing what he can do, or may choose to try. A wild beast cornered is not safe to approach. And Saruman has powers you do not guess. Beware of his voice!'
Gandalf	'I have been in Orthanc and I know my peril.'
Gandalf	'Aragorn shall come with me. Let the others await us at the foot of the stairs. They will hear and see enough, if there is anything to hear or see.'
Gimli	'Legolas and I wish for a closer view. We alone here represent our kindred. We also will come behind.'
Pippin	'I wish I could slip off back to the guardroom unnoticed! What did we come for? We are not wanted.'
Gandalf	'Saruman come forth!'
Théoden	'and I curse the day when I first listened to it.'
Wormtongue	'And do not waste our time!'
Gimli	'In the language of Orthanc help means ruin, and saving means slaying, that is plain. But we do not come here to beg.'
Glóin	' he said. '
Háma	's Deep!'
Éomer	's son!'
Théoden	's body before the gates of the Hornburg, after he was dead. When you hang from a gibbet at your window for the sport of your own crows, I will have peace with you and Orthanc. So much for the House of Eorl. A lesser son of great sires am I, but I do not need to lick your fingers. Turn elsewhither. But I fear your voice has lost its charm.'
Théoden	's their master'
Gandalf	'Or, perhaps, you have things to unsay?'
Saruman	'Unsay? I endeavoured to advise you for your own good, but you scarcely listened. You are proud and do not love advice, having indeed a store of your own wisdom. But on that occasion you erred, I think, misconstruing my intentions wilfully. I fear that in my eagerness to persuade you, I lost patience. And indeed I regret it. For I bore you no ill-will; and even now I bear none, though you return to me in the company of the violent and the ignorant. How should I? Are we not both members of a high and ancient order, most excellent in Middle-earth? Our friendship would profit us both alike. Much we could still accomplish together, to heal the disorders of the world. Let us understand one another, and dismiss from thought these lesser folk! Let them wait on our decisions! For the common good I am willing to redress the past, and to receive you. Will you not consult with me? Will you not come up?'
Théoden	'He will betray us; he will go - we shall be lost.'
Gandalf	'Understand one another? I fear I am beyond your comprehension. But you, Saruman, I understand now too well. I keep a clearer memory of your arguments, and deeds, than you suppose. When last I visited you, you were the jailor of Mordor, and there I was to be sent. Nay, the guest who has escaped from the roof, will think twice before he comes back in by the door. Nay, I do not think I will come up. But listen, Saruman, for the last time! Will you not come down? Isengard has proved less strong than your hope and fancy made it. So may other things in which you still have trust. Would it not be well to leave it for a while? To turn to new things, perhaps? Think well, Saruman! Will you not come down?'
Gandalf	'But you need not fear for your skin. I do not wish to kill you, or hurt you, as you would know, if you really understood me. And I have the power to protect you. I am giving you a last chance. You can leave Orthanc, free - if you choose.'
Grey	'? There are conditions, I presume?'
Gandalf	': free from bond, of chain or command: to go where you will, even, even to Mordor, Saruman, if you desire. But you will first surrender to me the Key of Orthanc, and your staff. They shall be pledges of your conduct, to be returned later, if you merit them.'
Saruman	'Later! Yes, when you also have the Keys of Barad-dûr itself, I suppose; and the crowns of seven kings. and the rods of the Five Wizards, and have purchased yourself a pair of boots many sizes larger than those that you wear now. A modest plan. Hardly one in which my help is needed! I have other things to do. Do not be a fool. If you wish to treat with me, while you have a chance, go away, and come back when you are sober! And leave behind these cut-throats and small rag-tag that dangle at your tail! Good day!'
Gandalf	'Behold, I am not Gandalf the Grey, whom you betrayed. I am Gandalf the White, who has returned from death. You have no colour now, and I cast you from the order and from the Council.'
Gandalf	' said Gandalf. With a cry Saruman fell back and crawled away. At that moment a heavy shining thing came hurtling down from above. It glanced off the iron rail, even as Saruman left it, and passing close to Gandalf'
Pippin	'It is not a thing, I guess, that Saruman would have chosen to cast away.'
Gimli	's throw, at least!'
Gandalf	'Let us go.'
Gandalf	'Now I must find Treebeard and tell him how things have gone.'
Merry	'Were they likely to end any other way?'
Gandalf	'though they came to the balance of a hair. But I had reasons for trying; some merciful and some less so. First Saruman was shown that the power of his voice was waning. He cannot be both tyrant and counsellor. When the plot is ripe it remains no longer secret. Yet he fell into the trap, and tried to deal with his victims piece-meal, while others listened. Then I gave him a last choice and a fair one: to renounce both Mordor and his private schemes, and make amends by helping us in our need. He knows our need, none better. Great service he could have rendered. But he has chosen to withhold it, and keep the power of Orthanc. He will not serve, only command. He lives now in terror of the shadow of Mordor, and yet he still dreams of riding the storm. Unhappy fool! He will be devoured, if the power of the East stretches out its arms to Isengard. We cannot destroy Orthanc from without, but Sauron - who knows what he can do?'
Gandalf	'I will do nothing to him. I do not wish for mastery. What w ill become of him? I cannot say. I grieve that so much that was good now festers in the tower. Still for us things have not gone badly. Strange are the turns of fortune! Often does hatred hurt itself! I guess that, even if we had entered in, we could have found few treasures in Orthanc more precious than the thing which Wormtongue threw down at us.'
Gandalf	'Let us leave them!'
Gandalf	'I have spoken of them, but you have not yet seen them.'
Legolas	'So you have come all the way from Mirkwood, my good Elf? A very great forest it used to be!'
Fangorn	's Wood. I scarcely passed beyond the eaves of it, and I did not wish to turn back.'
Legolas	'I have made a bargain with my friend that, if all goes well, we will visit Fangorn together - by your leave.'
Glóin	's son here.'
Fangorn	's Wood. Forty-two he hewed in the battle.'
Gandalf	'I fear that I must take your gatekeepers from you. But you will manage well enough without them.'
Saruman	's. Still, if I were overcome and all my trees destroyed, I would not come while I had one dark hole left to hide in.'
Gandalf	'But you have not plotted to cover all the world with your trees and choke all other living things. But there it is, Saruman remains to nurse his hatred and weave again such webs as he can. He has the Key of Orthanc. But he must not be allowed to escape.'
Gandalf	'That is what I hoped. Now I can go and turn to other matters with one care the less. But you must be wary. The waters have gone down. It will not be enough to put sentinels round the tower, I fear. I do not doubt that there were deep ways delved under Orthanc, and that Saruman hopes to go and come unmarked, before long. If you will undertake the labour, I beg you to pour in the waters again; and do so, until Isengard remains a standing pool, or you discover the outlets. When all the underground places are drowned, and the outlets blocked, then Saruman must stay upstairs and look out of the windows.'
Merry	't know how you feel with small rag-tag dangling behind you; but the rag-tag is tired and will be glad to stop dangling and lie down.'
Gandalf	't let it rankle! Be thankful no longer words were aimed at you. He had his eyes on you. If it is any comfort to your pride, I should say that, at the moment, you and Pippin are more in his thoughts than all the rest of us. Who you are; how you came there, and why; what you know; whether you were captured, and if so, how you escaped when all the Orcs perished - it is with those little riddles that the great mind of Saruman is troubled. A sneer from him, Meriadoc, is a compliment, if you feel honoured by his concern.'
Merry	'But it is a greater honour to dangle at your tail, Gandalf. For one thing, in that position one has a chance of putting a question a second time. Are we riding far tonight?'
Isengard	's Deep, to warn them that the king is returning tomorrow. He will ride from there with many men to Dunharrow by paths among the hills. From now on no more than two or three together are to go openly over the land, by day or night, when it can be avoided.'
Merry	't know anything about this country.'
Strider	'd won the battle!'
Isengard	's Vale, I think; and towards Rohan. The less it sees the better.'
Dol Baran	's bracken, among which the tight-curled fronds of spring were just thrusting through the sweet-scented earth. Thornbushes grew thick upon the low banks, and under them they made their camp, two hours or so before the middle of the night. They lit a fire in a hollow, down among the roots of a spreading hawthorn, tall as a tree, writhen with age; but hale in every limb. Buds were swelling at each twig'
Merry	'Are you lying on an ant-hill?'
Pippin	'm not comfortable. I wonder how long it is since I slept in a bed?'
Merry	'But you must know how long it is since we left Lórien.'
Pippin	'I mean a real bed in a bedroom.'
Merry	'But I could sleep anywhere tonight.'
Merry	'You were riding with Gandalf.'
Merry	's superior: head of the Council, whatever that may be exactly. He was Saruman the White. Gandalf is the White now. Saruman came when he was told, and his rod was taken; and then he was just told to go, and he went!'
Pippin	' Pippin'
Merry	's saying - the one Sam used to quote: Do not meddle in the at Fairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to anger.'
Pippin	'I should like a bit of information as well as danger. I should like a look at that ball.'
Merry	'll get information enough, sooner or later. My dear Pippin, no Took ever beat a Brandybuck for inquisitiveness; but is this the time, I ask you?'
Gandalf	't-have-it so-go-to-sleep!'
Merry	't keep awake any longer. If I yawn any more, I shall split at the ears. Good night!'
Pippin	'Only some bundle of oddments, perhaps, after all,'
Pippin	'm a bit calmer. So I may as well have a look first. Not just here though!'
Pippin	' The wizard'
Gandalf	'I will send for it at once. Do you understand? Say just that!'
Peregrin Took	'Come back!'
Gandalf	'Gandalf! Forgive me!'
Pippin	't. And then he came and questioned me; and he looked at me, and, and that is all I remember.'
Gandalf	'What did you see, and what did you say?'
Merry	'Speak!'
Pippin	'And tiny stars. It seemed very far away and long ago, yet hard and clear. Then the stars went in and out-they were cut off by things with wings. Very big, I think, really; but in the glass they looked like bats wheeling round the tower. I thought there were nine of them. One began to fly straight towards me, getting bigger and bigger. It had a horrible - no, no! I can'
Peregrin Took	't shudder! If you will meddle in the affairs of Wizards, you must be prepared to think of such things. But come! I forgive you. Be comforted! Things have not turned out as evilly as they might.'
Merry	't put a lump of rock under my elbow again! Now, I will leave you two together for a while.'
Gandalf	'We have had a narrow escape!'
Gandalf	'He was not held long, and hobbits have an amazing power of recovery. The memory, or the horror of it, will probably fade quickly. Too quickly, perhaps. Will you, Aragorn, take the Orthanc-stone and guard it? It is a dangerous charge.'
Gandalf	'But at the least keep this thing secret. You, and all others that stand here! The hobbit, Peregrin, above all should not know where it is bestowed. The evil fit may come on him again. For alas! he has handled it and looked in it, as should never have happened. He ought never to have touched it in Isengard, and there I should have been quicker. But my mind was bent on Saruman, and I did not at once guess the nature of the Stone. Then I was weary, and as I lay pondering it, sleep overcame me. Now I know!'
Isengard	'But it has long been said: oft evil will shall evil mar.'
Gandalf	'But at this time we have been strangely fortunate. Maybe, I have been saved by this hobbit from a grave blunder. I had considered whether or not to probe this Stone myself to find its uses. Had I done so, I should have been revealed to him myself. I am not ready for such a trial, if indeed I shall ever be so: But even if I found the power to withdraw myself, it would be disastrous for him to see me, yet - until the hour comes when secrecy will avail no longer.'
Gandalf	'There remains a short while of doubt which we must use. The Enemy, it is clear, thought that the Stone was in Orthanc - why should he not? And that therefore the hobbit was captive there, driven to look in the glass for his torment by Saruman. That dark mind will be filled now with the voice and face of the hobbit and with expectation: it may take some time before he learns his error. We must snatch that time. We have been too leisurely. We must move. The neighbourhood of Isengard is no place now to linger in. I will ride ahead at once with Peregrin Took. It will be better for him than lying in the dark while others sleep.'
Éomer	'They shall ride with me at early day. The rest may go with Aragorn and ride as soon as they have a mind.'
Gandalf	's Deep!'
Nazgûl	'The messenger of Mordor. The storm is coming. The Nazgûl have crossed the River! Ride, ride! Wait not for the dawn! Let not the swift wait for the slow! Ride!'
Shadowfax	's back. Aragorn lifted Pippin and set him in Gandalf'
Gandalf	'Away, Shadowfax!'
Merry	'Some folk have wonderful luck. He did not want to sleep, and he wanted to ride with Gandalf - and there he goes! Instead of being turned into a stone himself to stand here for ever as a warning.'
Gandalf	't a saddle or a bridle!'
Shadowfax	'But Shadowfax will have no harness. You do not ride Shadowfax: he is willing to carry you-or not. If he is willing, that is enough. It is then his business to see that you remain on his back, unless you jump off into the air.'
Pippin	'Fast by the wind, but very smooth. And how light his footfalls are!'
Gandalf	'but that is not fast for him. The land is rising a little here, and is more broken than it was beyond the river. But see how the White Mountains are drawing near under the stars! Yonder are the Thrihyrne peaks like black spears. It will not be long before we reach the branching roads and come to the Deeping-coomb, where the battle was fought two nights ago.'
Pippin	't interest you, perhaps. But I have never heard this one. What is it about - the seven stars and seven stones?'
Pippin	'by the Enemy?'
Sauron	's too. The palantíri came from beyond Westernesse from Eldamar. The Noldor made them. Fëanor himself, maybe, wrought them, in days so long ago that the time cannot be measured in years. But there is nothing that Sauron cannot turn to evil uses. Alas for Saruman! It was his downfall, as I now perceive. Perilous to us all are the devices of an art deeper than we possess ourselves. Yet he must bear the blame. Fool! to keep it secret, for his own profit. No word did he ever speak of it to any of the Council. We had not yet given thought to the fate of the palantíri of Gondor in its ruinous wars. By Men they were almost forgotten. Even in Gondor they were a secret known only to a few; in Arnor they were remembered only in a rhyme of lore among the Dúnedain.'
Gandalf	'In that way they long guarded and united the realm of Gondor. They set up Stones at Minas Anor, and at Minas Ithil, and at Orthanc in the ring of Isengard. The chief and master of these was under the Dome of Stars at Osgiliath before its ruin. The three others were far away in the North. In the house of Elrond it is told that they were at Annúminas, and Amon Sûl, and Elendil'
Saruman	's foot, the spider in a steel web! How long, I wonder, has he been constrained to come often to his glass for inspection and instruction, and the Orthanc-stone so bent towards Barad-dûr that, if any save a will of adamant now looks into it, it will bear his mind and sight swiftly thither? And how it draws one to itself! Have I not felt it? Even now my heart desires to test my will upon it, to see if I could not wrench it from him and turn it where I would-to look across the wide seas of water and of time to Tirion the Fair, and perceive the unimaginable hand and mind of Fëanor at their work, while both the White Tree and the Golden were in flower!'
Pippin	'I had no notion of what I was doing.'
Gandalf	'You knew you were behaving wrongly and foolishly; and you told yourself so, though you did not listen. I did not tell you all this before, because it is only by musing on all that has happened that I have at last understood, even as we ride together. But if I had spoken sooner, it would not have lessened your desire, or made it easier to resist. On the contrary! No, the burned hand teaches best. After that advice about fire goes to the heart.'
Pippin	'If all the seven stones were laid out before me now, I should shut my eyes and put my hands in my pockets.'
Gandalf	'That is what I hoped.'
Gandalf	'If the giving of information is to be the cure of your inquisitiveness, I shall spend all the rest of my days in answering you. What more do you want to know?'
Pippin	". What was it? What could it do at Isengard?'
Black	'It could have taken you away to the Dark Tower.'
Pippin	't know that I had… '
Gandalf	'The Westfold dales are opening before us. Here we come back to the eastward road. The dark shadow yonder is the mouth of the Deeping-coomb. That way lies Aglarond and the Glittering Caves. Do not ask me about them. Ask Gimli, if you meet again, and for the first time you may get an answer longer than you wish. You will not see the caves yourself, not on this journey. Soon they will be far behind.'
Pippin	'Where are you going then?'
Sam	'll warrant. Phew! Can you smell it?'
Frodo	`we cannot stay here all night, fix or no fix. We must find a more sheltered spot, and camp once more; and perhaps another day will show us a path.'
Sam	've come the wrong way.'
Frodo	't know what is to be done. What food have we got left?'
Frodo	've lugged my cooking-gear all the way from the last camp, and what use has it been? Naught to make a fire with, for a start; and naught to cook, not even grass!'
Frodo	've heard nothing, and seen nothing, for two nights now.'
Sam	'll give him gollum in his throat, if ever I get my hands on his neck.'
Frodo	't leave many footprints, nor much scent, even for his snuffling nose.'
Sam	'I wish we could be rid of him for good!'
Frodo	've got to get down today somehow.'
Frodo	's see what it leads to!'
Sam	't fly can jump!'
Frodo	`about eighteen fathoms I should guess. Not more.'
Sam	's better than climbing.'
Frodo	`I think we could climb here; and I think we shall have to try. See - the rock is quite different from what it was a few miles back. It has slipped and cracked.'
Frodo	'm going to try it,'
Sam	'm going first.'
Frodo	's made you change your mind about climbing?'
Frodo	`I could at any rate; and you could too. if you kept your head and followed me carefully.'
Sam	's nowhere to put your feet or your hands?'
Sam	'Better wait till morning and more light.'
Frodo	't you follow till I come back or call!'
Sam	'Master!'
Frodo	't do anything without a rope.'
Gamgee	's what the Gaffer said to me often enough, it being a word of his. Rope!'
Frodo	'Never mind your Gaffer! Are you trying to tell yourself you'
Frodo	'd clean forgotten it!'
Frodo	'What a piece of luck you had that rope!'
Sam	" he said: Haldir, or one of those folk. And he spoke right.'
Frodo	`but I left the Company in such a hurry and confusion. If only we had enough we could use it to get down. How long is your rope, I wonder?'
Sam	'Five, ten, twenty, thirty ells, more or less,'
Sam	's tough; and soft as milk to the hand. Packs close too, and as light as light. Wonderful folk to be sure!'
Frodo	'm going to try it.'
Frodo	's over.'
Frodo	`Do you know, I thought for a bit that I had lost my sight? From the lightning or something else worse. I could see nothing, nothing at all, until the grey rope came down. It seemed to shimmer somehow.'
Frodo	's no more than your guess at the height of the cliff.'
Frodo	'll follow. I feel quite myself again now.'
Sam	's get it over! '
Frodo	'm down! '
Sam	've gone! I thought it seemed a bit too easy.'
Frodo	`Climb up and untie it and let yourself down, if you want to!'
Sam	`It goes hard parting with anything I brought out of the Elf-country. Made by Galadriel herself, too, maybe. Galadriel,'
Frodo	`A good thing it held as long as it did! To think that I trusted all my weight to your knot!'
Frodo	's eldest brother he had a rope-walk over by Tighfield many a year. And I put as fast a hitch over the stump as any one could have done, in the Shire or out of it.'
Sam	't neither. Not a strand!'
Frodo	`but I think the rope came off itself - when I called.'
Frodo	've got to think of our next move. Night will be on us soon. How beautiful the stars are, and the Moon!'
Sam	's beginning to give quite a light.'
Frodo	'll try the marshes by the light of half a moon.'
Sam	've set a little puzzle for that footpad, anyhow. He can try his nasty flappy feet on those ledges!'
Sam	`We might find some nook there, or even a cave or something.'
Frodo	'd go on till my legs gave way.'
Frodo	`Look over there on the cliff!'
Sam	'd puzzle him with our bit of a climb! Look at him! Like a nasty crawling spider on a wall.'
Frodo	't like Sun or Moon.'
Frodo	`He can smell us, perhaps. And he can hear as keen as Elves, I believe. I think he has heard something now: our voices probably. We did a lot of shouting away back there; and we were talking far too loudly until a minute ago.'
Sam	't suppose we could give him the slip now anyway.'
Frodo	's much more dangerous than he looks.'
Sam	's his Precious? Does he mean the'
Frodo	's getting near now, near enough to hear a whisper.'
Sam	't come sneaking after us no more, I say.'
Frodo	't do that, not as things are. Poor wretch! He has done us no harm.'
Sam	's his plan.'
Frodo	`But what he means to do is another matter.'
Frodo	's all, while we keep an eye on you. But you must help us, if you can. One good turn deserves another.'
Sam	's mood and that the matter was beyond argument. All the same he was amazed at Frodo'
Frodo	`We are going to Mordor, of course. And you know the way there, I believe.'
Frodo	't you?'
Frodo	`But if you really wish to be free of him again. then you must help me. And that I fear means finding us a path towards him. But you need not go all the way, not beyond the gates of his land.'
Sméagol	's lost now.'
Frodo	'll start tonight.'
Frodo	't move!'
Sam	's round your neck this rope ought to go, and a tight noose too.'
Frodo	's no good tying his legs-or his arms. he seems to use them nearly as much. Tie one end to his ankle, and keep a grip on the other end.'
Frodo	't wish to hurt you.'
Frodo	`not unless there is any promise you can make that I can trust.'
Frodo	'Sméagol will swear on the Precious.'
Frodo	' he said. '
Frodo	'Sméagol will swear never, never, to let Him have it. Never! Sméagol will save it. But he must swear on the Precious.'
Frodo	'All you wish is to see it and touch it, if you can, though you know it would drive you mad. Not on it. Swear by it, if you will. For you know where it is. Yes, you know, Sméagol. It is before you.'
Frodo	`Now speak your promise!'
Moon	'd better start.'
North	't cross the Marshes, they go round for miles and miles. Very lucky you came this way. Very lucky you found Sméagol, yes. Follow Sméagol!'
Sam	've got the rope handy.'
Sam	't: not Sam Gamgee for one.'
Sméagol	't see me.'
Frodo	`but we will stay here: we are too tired to go any further at present.'
Frodo	`Are you hungry, Sméagol? We have very little to share, but we will spare you what we can.'
Frodo	'and water, if the water here is fit to drink.'
Frodo	't wash the smell off his hands, my nice hands.'
Sméagol	' food. He will starve. Poor thin Sméagol! '
Frodo	't even try, not yet anyway.'
Sam	's behaviour had made him attend to its flavour again. But he did not feel comfortable. Gollum watched every morsel from hand to mouth, like an expectant dog by a diner'
Frodo	's loose.'
Frodo	't think there is any need for fear - at present. Still watch if you wish. Give me about two hours, not more, and then call me.'
Sam	't wake up never again.'
Frodo	's mind, drawn from the Gaffer'
Sméagol	`Be back soon.'
Sam	'Hi! Come back!'
Frodo	's the time?'
Sam	's hungry.'
Frodo	't leave his Precious, anyway.'
Frodo	'You were worn out, and it has turned out well: we are now both rested. And we have a hard road ahead, the worst road of all.'
Sam	've been a bit free with it so far.'
Frodo	`We were miserably delayed in the hills. But Samwise Gamgee, my dear hobbit - indeed, Sam my dearest hobbit, friend of friends - I do not think we need give thought to what comes after that. To do the job as you put it - what hope is there that we ever shall? And if we do, who knows what will come of that? If the One goes into the Fire, and we are at hand? I ask you, Sam, are we ever likely to need bread again? I think not. If we can nurse our limbs to bring us to Mount Doom, that is all we can do. More than I can, I begin to feel.'
Sam	's that dratted creature?'
Sam	'Brr! The nasty creature; the poor wretch! '
Frodo	'Must we cross these evil-smelling fens? '
Sméagol	't want Him to see. Follow Sméagol! He can take you through the marshes, through the mists. nice thick mists. Follow Sméagol very carefully, and you may go a long way. quite a long way, before He catches you, yes perhaps.'
Sam	're all round us now. Are we trapped? Who are they? '
Frodo	's keep up with him and get out of this cursed place as quick as we can - if we can! '
Frodo	'm coming. Go on! '
Sam	'Dead faces! '
Frodo	'I know not who they are; but I thought I saw there Men and Elves, and Orcs beside them.'
Sam	't be really there! Is it some devilry hatched in the Dark Land? '
Sméagol	'You cannot reach them, you cannot touch them. We tried once, .yes, precious. I tried once; but you cannot reach them. Only shapes to see, perhaps, not to touch. No precious! All dead.'
Sméagol	't we get on and get away? '
Sméagol	't look at lights! '
Sam	's the need to sniff? The stink nearly knocks me down with my nose held. You stink, and master stinks; the whole place stinks.'
Sméagol	's not happy.'
Sméagol	's leg. He speaks nicely to me.'
Sméagol	`Not now. Not yet.'
Sméagol	's evening. Dusk is creeping. Time to go.'
Sam	'Curse him! I wish he was choked!'
Sméagol	't look nice at all. O no! O no!'
Sam	's get it over! '
Sam	'd have to get a wash first, or he wouldn'
Sméagol	'll see. And we do see. O yes. my precious, we do see. Sméagol knew hobbits could not go this way. O yes. Sméagol knew '
Frodo	`I said so, because I purpose to enter Mordor, and I know no other way. Therefore I shall go this way. I do not ask anyone to go with me.'
Sméagol	't go to the Gate! '
Frodo	'If there is only one way, then I must take it. What comes after must come.'
Frodo	'There is another way. O yes indeed there is. Another way. darker, more difficult to find, more secret. But Sméagol knows it. Let Sméagol show you! '
Sméagol	's still there! '
Stinker	'Precious'
Stinker	'll do next.'
Sméagol	'for twice now we have been in your power, and you have done no harm to us. Nor have you tried to take from me what you once sought. May the third time prove the best! But I warn you, Sméagol, you are in danger.'
Sméagol	't run away. He must help nice master.'
Frodo	'I mean a danger to yourself alone. You swore a promise by what you call the Precious. Remember that! It will hold you to it; but it will seek a way to twist it to your own undoing. Already you are being twisted. You revealed yourself to me just now, foolishly. Give it back to Sméagol you said. Do not say that again! Do not let that thought grow in you! You will never get it back. But the desire of it may betray you to a bitter end. You will never get it back. In the last need, Sméagol, I should put on the Precious; and the Precious mastered you long ago. If I, wearing it, were to command you, you would obey, even if it were to leap from a precipice or to cast yourself into the fire. And such would be my command. So have a care, Sméagol!'
Frodo	`Come now, Gollum or Sméagol if you wish, tell me of this other way, and show me, if you can, what hope there is in it, enough to justify me in turning aside from my plain path. I am in haste.'
Frodo	`poor little Sméagol'
Frodo	`But do not wander from your road. What of the third turning? '
Elendil	`It was Isildur who cut off the finger of the Enemy.'
Black	's city.'
Frodo	'But what has the Tower of the Moon to do with us? '
Sam	't empty, is it? '
Sam	'that we should go another long march south, to find ourselves in the same fix or a worse one, when we get there, if we ever do? '
Sam	`Have you been talking to Him lately? Or just hobnobbing with Orcs? '
Frodo	's here in the North that the big danger is for Him, and for us. He will come out of the Black Gate one day, one day soon. That is the only way big armies can come. But away down west He is not afraid, and there are the Silent Watchers.'
Sam	's not. sense. We might as well do it here, and save ourselves a long tramp.'
Sam	' As he said this, he caught or fancied he caught a green gleam in Gollum'
Frodo	`And did you escape out of the darkness, Sméagol? Were you not rather permitted to depart upon an errand? That at least is w hat Aragorn thought, who found you by the Dead Marshes some years ago.'
Frodo	'escape'
Frodo	's guidance had been taken from them too soon, too soon, while the Dark Land was still very far away. How they should enter it at the last Gandalf had not said. Perhaps he could not say. Into the stronghold of the Enemy in the North, into Dol Guldur, he had once ventured. But into Mordor, to the Mountain of Fire and to Barad-dûr, since the Dark Lord rose in power again, had he ever journeyed there? Frodo did not think so. And here he was a little halfling from the Shire, a simple hobbit of the quiet countryside expected to find a way where the great ones could not go, or dared not go. It was an evil fate. But he had taken it on himself in his own sitting-room in the far-off spring of another year, so remote now that it was like a chapter in a story of the world'
Black	't see much by daylight, can they? '
Frodo	`But their steeds could see. And these winged creatures that they ride on now, they can probably see more than any other creature. They are like great carrion birds. They are looking for something: the Enemy is on the watch, I fear.'
Frodo	`What is that?'
Sméagol	's end: they came up that road. They have passed on to the Black Gate; but more may follow. Always more people coming to Mordor. One day all the peoples will be inside.'
Sam	'speaking poetry'
Bree	't no such a beast.'
Sméagol	't he come with Sméagol? '
Frodo	's all. Well, Sméagol, the third turn may turn the best. I will come with you.'
Frodo	`Good master! Then rest now, nice hobbits, under the shadow of the stones, close under the stones! Rest and lie quiet, till the Yellow Face goes away. Then we can go quickly. Soft and quick as shadows we must be!'
Sméagol	's very hungry, yes, gollum!'
Frodo	`something hot out of the pot'
Sam	's always ready to help. Could you find anything fit for a hungry hobbit? '
Sam `I	't nice enough, I begs.'
Frodo	's like that, and sometimes it shines through, somehow. But I love him, whether or no.'
Sméagol	't catch things all in a minute.'
Sméagol	'But what does the hobbit want all that water for? He has drunk, he has washed.'
Sam	'll carve you into mincemeat.'
Frodo	'm going to wake him up.'
Sam	't do it!'
Sam	'm going to stew these coneys.'
Sam	's any comfort to you.'
Sam	`is some herbs and roots, especially taters - not to mention bread. Herbs we can manage, seemingly.'
Sméagol	's starving or very sick, poor Sméagol. '
Sméagol	'd give a lot for half a dozen taters.'
Sméagol	's taters, precious, eh, what'
Sméagol	't say no to that.'
Sam	'Go to sleep!'
Sam	`Not resting? Is anything wrong? What is the time? '
Frodo	't brought no bowls, nor nothing proper.'
Frodo	'And lighting a fire was dangerous in these parts. But I do feel hungry. Hmm! Can I smell it from here? What have you stewed? '
Sméagol	's nought to go with them but a few herbs.'
Sam	's some left, if you want to try stewed coney.'
Stinker	's not pleased with Sam, O no precious, not pleased at all.'
Frodo	`I thought I heard voices.'
Ithilien	'tis said.'
Sam	't let two tired travellers rest.'
Faramir	`But there are no travellers in this land: only the servants of the Dark Tower, or of the White.'
Frodo	`And travellers we are, whatever Captain Faramir may say.'
Faramir	'We have a work to do, and this is no time or place for riddling or parleying. Come! Where is the third of your company? '
Drogo	'Seven companions we had: one we lost at Moria, the others we left at Parth Galen above Rauros: two of my kin; a Dwarf there was also, and an Elf, and two Men. They were Aragorn; and Boromir, who said that he came out of Minas Tirith, a city in the South.'
Faramir	'You came with him? That is news indeed, if it be true. Know, little strangers, that Boromir son of Denethor was High Warden of the White Tower, and our Captain-General: sorely do we miss him. Who are you then, and what had you to do with him? Be swift, for the Sun is climbing!'
Faramir	`It is some token of your truth that you also know them.'
Frodo	'And we are the Halflings that the rhyme spoke of.'
Faramir	's Bane? '
Frodo	`Doubtless it will be made clear in time.'
Faramir	'But not now. We have business in hand. You are in peril. and you would not have gone far by field or road this day. There will be hard handstrokes nigh at hand ere the day is full. Then death, or swift flight bark to Anduin. I will leave two to guard you, for your good and for mine. Wise man trusts not to chance-meeting on the road in this land. If I return, I will speak more with you.'
Frodo	`Think what you will, I am a friend of all enemies of the One Enemy. We would go with you, if we halfling folk could hope to serve you, such doughty men and strong as you seem, and if my errand permitted it. May the light shine on your swords!'
Faramir	`Farewell!'
Anduin	'and we seldom come so far afield. But we have a new errand on this journey: we come to ambush the Men of Harad. Curse them! '
Umbar	'Tis many lives of Men since any passed to or fro between us. Now of late we have learned that the Enemy has been among them, and they are gone over to Him, or back to Him-they were ever ready to His will-as have so many also in the East. I doubt not that the days of Gondor are numbered, and the walls of Minas Tirith are doomed, so great is His strength and malice.'
Mablung	`These cursed Southrons come now marching up the ancient roads to swell the hosts of the Dark Tower. Yea, up the very roads that craft of Gondor made. And they go ever more heedlessly, we learn, thinking that the power of their new master is great enough, so that the mere shadow of His hills will protect them. We come to teach them another lesson. Great strength of them was reported to us some days ago, marching north. One of their regiments is due by our reckoning to pass by, some time ere noon-up on the road above, where it passes through the cloven way. The road may pass, but they shall not! Not while Faramir is Captain. He leads now in all perilous ventures. But his life is charmed, or fate spares him for some other end.'
Sam	'll look after himself.'
Frodo	're as near as I want them now.'
Damrod	`See! Some of the Southrons have broken from the trap and are flying from the road. There they go! Our men after them, and the Captain leading.'
Sam	's first view of a battle of Men against Men, and he did not like it much. He was glad that he could not see the dead face. He wondered what the man'
Damrod	'May the Valar turn him aside! Mûmak! Mûmak!'
Sam	'll have a bit of sleep.'
Mablung	`But the Captain will return, if he is unhurt; and when he comes we shall depart swiftly. We shall be pursued as soon as news of our deed reaches the Enemy, and that will not be long.'
Sam	`No need to disturb my sleep. I was walking all night.'
Master Samwise	'But you shall see.'
Sam	's aid if needed. He could see Faramir'
Frodo	's account of himself at several points: what part he had to play in the Company that set out from Rivendell; why he had left Boromir; and where he was now going. In particular he returned often to Isildur'
Isildur	`If then you are the Halfling that was named, doubtless you brought this thing, whatever it may be, to the Council of which you speak, and there Boromir saw it. Do you deny it? '
Faramir	`I wish then to learn from you more of it; for what concerns Boromir concerns me. An orc-arrow slew Isildur, so far as old tales tell. But orc-arrows are plenty, and the sight of one would not be taken as a sign of Doom by Boromir of Gondor. Had you this thing in keeping? It is hidden, you say; but is not that because you choose to hide it? '
Frodo	`It does not belong to me. It does not belong to any mortal, great or small; though if any could claim it, it would be Aragorn son of Arathorn, whom I named, the leader of our Company from Moria to Rauros.'
Elendil	's sword.'
Elendil	' But Faramir'
Frodo	`Indeed, if Boromir were here, he would answer all your questions. And since he was already at Rauros many days back, and intended then to go straight to your city, if you return, you may soon learn the answers there. My part in the Company was known to him, as to all the others. for it was appointed to me by Elrond of Imladris himself before the whole Council. On that errand I came into this country, but it is not mine to reveal to any outside the Company. Yet those who claim to oppose the Enemy would do well not to hinder it.'
Faramir	'Yes, I was his friend, for my part.'
Faramir	`Then you would grieve to learn that Boromir is dead? '
Faramir	`Do you mean that he is dead, and that you knew it? You have been trying to trap me in words, playing with me? Or are you now trying to snare me with a falsehood?'
Faramir	`and treachery not the least.'
Frodo	's no right to talk to you so. After all you'
Faramir	'd got a new friend, he would.'
Faramir	`Do not speak before your master, whose wit is greater than yours. And I do not need any to teach me of our peril. Even so, I spare a brief time, in order to judge justly in a hard matter. Were I as hasty as you, I might have slain you long ago. For I am commanded to slay all whom I find in this land without the leave of the Lord of Gondor. But I do not slay man or beast needlessly, and not gladly even when it is needed. Neither do I talk in vain. So be comforted. Sit by your master, and be silent! '
Faramir	'tis said. Boromir was my brother.'
Faramir	'I remember that Boromir bore a horn,'
Faramir	`Then maybe you can see it in your mind'
Frodo	'That was indeed Boromir as I knew him. For the golden belt was given to him in Lothlórien by the Lady Galadriel. She it was that clothed us as you see us, in elven-grey. This brooch is of the same workmanship.'
Faramir	`Much that was strange about you I begin now to understand. Will you not tell me more? For it is a bitter thought that Boromir died, within sight of the land of his home.'
Frodo	`Though your tale fills me with foreboding. A vision it was that you saw, I think, and no more, some shadow of evil fortune that has been or will be. Unless indeed it is some lying trick of the Enemy. I have seen the faces of fair warriors of old laid in sleep beneath the pools of the Dead Marshes, or seeming so by his foul arts.'
Faramir	'For his works fill the heart with loathing; but my heart was filled with grief and pity.'
Frodo	'For no boat could have been carried over the stony hills from Tol Brandir; and Boromir purposed to go home across the Entwash and the fields of Rohan. And yet how could any vessel ride the foam of the great falls and not founder in the boiling pools, though laden with water? '
Faramir	'But whence came the boat? '
Frodo	'In three such boats we rowed down Anduin to the Falls. They also were of elven-work.'
Faramir	`but it seems that you little understood its power. If Men have dealings with the Mistress of Magic who dwells in the Golden Wood, then they may look for strange things to follow. For it is perilous for mortal man to walk out of the world of this Sun, and few of old came thence unchanged, '
Boromir	`What did she say to you, the Lady that dies not? What did she see? What woke in your heart then? Why went you ever to Laurelindórenan, and came not by your own road, upon the horses of Rohan riding home in the morning?'
Frodo	'To those questions I guess that you could make some answer, Frodo son of Drogo. But not here or now. maybe. But lest you still should think my tale a vision, I will tell you this. The horn of Boromir at least returned in truth, and not in seeming. The horn came, but it was cloven in two, as it were by axe or sword. The shards came severally to shore: one was found among the reeds where watchers of Gondor lay, northwards below the infalls of the Entwash; the other was found spinning on the flood by one who had an errand in the water. Strange chances, but murder will out, '
Frodo	`there is something strange about you, Frodo, an elvish air, maybe. But more lies upon our words together than I thought at first. I should now take you back to Minas Tirith to answer there to Denethor, and my life will justly be forfeit, if I now choose a course that proves ill for my city. So I will not decide in haste what is to be done. Yet we must move hence without more delay.'
Faramir	`You cannot go along the road southwards, if that was your purpose. It will be unsafe for some days, and always more closely watched after this affray than it has been yet. And you cannot, I think, go far today in any case, for you are weary. And so are we. We are going now to a secret place we have, somewhat less than ten miles from here. The Orcs and spies of the Enemy have not found it yet, and if they did, we could hold it long even against many. There we may lie up and rest for a while, and you with us. In the morning I will decide what is best for me to do, and for you.'
Faramir	's Bane. You were not wholly frank with me, Frodo.'
Faramir	's Bane lay between you and was a cause of contention in your Company. Clearly it is a mighty heirloom of some sort, and such things do not breed peace among confederates, not if aught may be learned from ancient tales. Do I not hit near the mark?'
Frodo	'but not in the gold. There was no contention in our Company, though there was doubt: doubt which way we should take from the Emyn Muil. But be that as it may, ancient tales teach us also the peril of rash words concerning such things as - heirlooms.'
Frodo	's Bane. Forgive me! It was unwise in such an hour and place. I had not had time for thought. We had had a hard fight, and there was more than enough to fill my mind. But even as I spoke with you, I drew nearer to the mark, and so deliberately shot wider. For you must know that much is still preserved of ancient lore among the Rulers of the city that is not spread abroad. We of my house are not of the line of Elendil. though the blood of Númenor is in us. For we reckon back our line to Mardil, the good steward, who ruled in the king'
Gondor	" Alas! poor Boromir. Does that not tell you something of him? '
Frodo	`Yet always he treated Aragorn with honour.'
Faramir	`If he were satisfied of Aragorn'
Grey	'Had he a name?'
Faramir	'and he was content. Many are my names in many countries, he said. Mithrandir among the Elves, Tharkûn to the Dwarves; Olórin I was in my youth in the West that is forgotten, in the South Incánus, in the North Gandalf; to the East I go not.'
Frodo	'I thought it was he. Gandalf the Grey dearest of counsellors. Leader of our Company. He was lost in Moria.'
Faramir	'An evil fate seems to have pursued your fellowship. It is hard indeed to believe that one of so great wisdom, and of power - for many wonderful things he did among us - could perish, and so much lore be taken from the world. Are you sure of this, and that he did not just leave you and depart where he would? '
Frodo	`I saw him fall into the abyss.'
Faramir	`which perhaps you may tell me in the evening-time. This Mithrandir was, I now guess, more than a lore-master: a great mover of the deeds that are done in our time. Had he been among us to consult concerning the hard words of our dream, he could have made them clear to us without need of messenger. Yet, maybe, he would not have done so, and the journey of Boromir was doomed. Mithrandir never spoke to us of what was to be, nor did he reveal his purposes. He got leave of Denethor, how I do not know, to look at the secrets of our treasury, and I learned a little of him, when he would teach (and that was seldom). Ever he would search and would question us above all else concerning the Great Battle that was fought upon Dagorlad in the beginning of Gondor, when He whom we do not name was overthrown. And he was eager for stories of Isildur, though of him we had less to tell; for nothing certain was ever known among us of his end.'
Faramir	's questioning. But it seemed then a matter that concerned only the seekers after ancient learning. Nor when the riddling words of our dream were debated among us, did I think of Isildur'
Frodo	'Nor do I. I would have nothing to do with such matters.'
Faramir	"I hope you will pardon it to one who has so far made his orders give way to courtesy as not to slay you or to bind you. But it is a command that no stranger, not even one of Rohan that fights with us, shall see the path we now go with open eyes. I must blindfold you.'
Frodo	'Even the Elves do likewise at need, and blindfolded we crossed the borders of fair Lothlórien. Gimli the dwarf took it ill, but the hobbits endured it.'
Faramir	'But I am glad that you will take this willingly and not by force.'
Faramir	`Securely, but not so as to discomfort them. Do not tie their hands. They will give their word not to try and see. I could trust them to shut their eyes of their own accord, but eyes will blink, if the feet stumble. Lead them so that they do not falter.'
Faramir	`Let them see! '
Faramir	`This is the Window of the Sunset, Henneth Annûn, fairest of all the falls of Ithilien, land of many fountains. Few strangers have ever seen it. But there is no kingly hall behind to match it. Enter now and see! '
Faramir	`Not a place of great ease but here you may pass the night in peace. It is dry at least, and there is food, though no fire. At one time the water flowed down through this cave and out of the arch, but its course was changed further up the gorge, by workmen of old, and the stream sent down in a fall of doubled height over the rocks far above. All the ways into this grot were then sealed against the entry of water or aught else, all save one. There are now but two ways out: that passage yonder by which you entered blindfold, and through the Window-curtain into a deep bowl filled with knives of stone. Now rest a while, until the evening meal is set.'
Mirkwood	'tis said.'
Faramir	`But that would be an ill omen, if it were so. We do not want the escapes of Mirkwood in Ithilien.'
Gamgee	've got to keep awake all the same.'
Sam	's like rain on a wilted lettuce. There! Now I can keep awake long enough to eat a bit.'
Frodo	`But if we are guests, we bow to our host, and after we have eaten we rise and thank him.'
Boromir	`or even from the fell thing you name, the Balrog - even though he was the last to leave.'
Frodo	's fall. But had there not been us lesser folk to care for, I do not think that either he or Boromir would have fled.'
Faramir	`and not gone on to the fate that waited above the falls of Rauros.'
Frodo	`For I would learn more of Minas Ithil and Osgiliath, and Minas Tirith the long-enduring. What hope have you for that city in your long war? '
Master Samwise	' said Faramir, `
Strider	' nonsense, and all wide of my mark.'
Faramir	`Perilously fair.'
Lórien	's so strong in herself. You, you could dash yourself to pieces on her, like a ship on a rock; or drownd yourself, like a hobbit in a river. But neither rock nor river would be to blame. Now Boro - '
Faramir	`What would you say? He took his peril with him? '
Lórien	's Ring! '
Faramir	's a chance to show your quality.'
Faramir	`So that is the answer to all the riddles! The One Ring that was thought to have perished from the world. And Boromir tried to take it by force? And you escaped? And ran all the way - to me! And here in the wild I have you: two halflings, and a host of men at my call, and the Ring of Rings. A pretty stroke of fortune! A chance for Faramir, Captain of Gondor, to show his quality! Ha!'
Boromir	' he said. `
Faramir	' asking, then you have pity and honour from me. And I marvel at you: to keep it hid and not to use it. You are a new people and a new world to me. Are all your kin of like sort? Your land must be a realm of peace and content, and there must gardeners be in high honour.'
Frodo	`but certainly gardeners are honoured.'
Sam	`You took the chance, sir.'
Faramir	'A pert servant, Master Samwise. But nay: the praise of the praiseworthy is above all rewards. Yet there was naught in this to praise. I had no lure or desire to do other than I have done.'
Faramir	`Maybe you discern from far away the air of Númenor. Good night!'
Frodo	's going on? '
Faramir	`Moonset over Gondor. Fair Ithil as he goes from Middle-earth, glances upon the white locks of old Mindolluin. It is worth a few shivers. But that is not what I brought you to see-though as for you, Samwise, you were not brought, and do but pay the penalty of your watchfulness. A draught of wine shall amend it. Come, look now! '
Faramir	`Now what would you say that it is, Anborn? A squirrel, or a kingfisher? Are there black kingfishers in the night-pools of Mirkwood? '
Anborn	`It has four limbs and dives manwise; a pretty mastery of the craft it shows, too. What is it at? Seeking a way up behind the Curtain to our hidings? It seems we are discovered at last. I have my bow here, and I have posted other archers, nigh as good marksmen as myself, on either bank. We wait only for your command to shoot, Captain.'
Frodo	`Yes,'
Faramir	`Come, now you have seen, tell me why it should be spared. In all our words together you have not once spoken of your gangrel companion, and I let him be for the time. He could wait till he was caught and brought before me. I sent my keenest huntsmen to seek him, but he slipped them, and they had no sight of him till now, save Anborn here, once at dusk yesterevening. But now he has done worse trespass than only to go coney-snaring in the uplands: he has dared to come to Henneth Annûn, and his life is forfeit. I marvel at the creature: so secret and so sly as he is, to come sporting in the pool before our very window. Does he think that men sleep without watch all night? Why does he so?'
Frodo	`For one thing, he knows little of Men, and sly though he is, your refuge is so hidden that perhaps he does not know that Men are concealed here. For another, I think he is allured here by a mastering desire, stronger than his caution.'
Faramir	`Can he, does he then know of your burden? '
Faramir	`This matter winds itself ever in new riddles. Then he is pursuing it? '
Frodo	`Look! '
Faramir	`It is a less perilous hunger. Or maybe not: fish from the pool of Henneth Annûn may cost him all he has to give.'
Anborn	`Shall I not shoot, Captain? For coming unbidden to this place death is our law.'
Faramir	`This is a harder matter than it seems. What have you to say now, Frodo? Why should we spare? '
Frodo	`and unaware of his danger. And Gandalf, your Mithrandir, he would have bidden you not to slay him for that reason, and for others. He forbade the Elves to do so. I do not know clearly why, and of what I guess I cannot speak openly out here. But this creature is in some way bound up with my errand. Until you found us and took us, he was my guide.'
Faramir	`The matter becomes ever stranger. I would do much for you, Frodo, but this I cannot grant: to let this sly wanderer go free at his own will from here, to join you later if it please him, or to be caught by Orcs and tell all he knows under threat of pain. He must be slain or taken. Slain, if he be not taken very swiftly. But how can this slippery thing of many guises be caught, save by a feathered shaft? '
Frodo	`You may keep your bows bent, and shoot me at least, if I fail. I shall not run away.'
Faramir	`If he comes off alive, he should be your faithful servant for the rest of his unhappy days. Lead Frodo down to the bank, Anborn, and go softly. The thing has a nose and ears. Give me your bow.'
Frodo	`Have a care to your right. If you fall in the pool, then no one but your fishing friend can help you. And forget not that there are bowmen near at hand, though you may not see them.'
Sméagol	'll take it, steal my Precious. Thieves. We hates them. Fissh, nice fissh: Makes us strong. Makes eyes bright, fingers tight, yes. Throttle them, precious. Throttle them all, yes, if we gets chances. Nice fissh. Nice fissh! '
Frodo	`We are in danger. Men will kill you, if they find you here. Come quickly, if you wish to escape death. Come to Master!'
Sméagol	't finished.'
Frodo	`Bring fish with you. Come! '
Frodo	'Precious will be angry. I shall take Precious, and I shall say: make him swallow the bones and choke. Never taste fish again. Come, Precious is waiting! '
Sméagol	's go! '
Frodo	`But not at once. I will go with you as I promised. I promise again. But not now. You are not safe yet. I will save you, but you must trust me.'
Faramir	`Or the Precious will be angry. We are going back now, up the stream. Go on, go on, you go in front! '
Frodo	'll go with you, and you shall come to no harm. Not unless they kill me too. Trust Master! '
Frodo	`Got him?'
Sam	`And nothing will ever be all right where that piece of misery is.'
Faramir	`And bring the prisoner to me.'
Faramir	'Nothing? Have you never done anything worthy of binding or of worse punishment? However, that is not for me to judge, happily. But tonight you have come where it is death to come. The fish of this pool are dearly bought.'
Faramir	`Only to come here and look on the pool bears the penalty of death. I have spared you so far at the prayer of Frodo here, who says that of him at least you have deserved some thanks. But you must also satisfy me. What is your name? Whence do you come? And whither do you go? What is your business? '
Faramir	'But just: yes perhaps, as just as our little wisdom allows. Unloose him Frodo! '
Frodo	' He cut the cords on Gollum'
Faramir	`Look at me! Do you know the name of this place? Have you been here before? '
Faramir	`Never came here; never come again.'
Faramir	`But in this I judge that you speak the truth. It is well for you. What oath will you swear never to return; and never to lead any living creature hither by word or sign?'
Frodo	`Sméagol promises to Precious, promises faithfully. Never come again, never speak, no never! No, precious, no!'
Frodo	'At least, you must either accept this promise or carry out your law. You will get no more. But I promised that if he came to me, he should not be harmed. And I would not be proved faithless.'
Faramir	`I surrender you to your master, to Frodo son of Drogo. Let him declare what he will do with you! '
Faramir	`you have not yet declared your will concerning the said Frodo, and until that is made known, he cannot shape his plans for himself or his companions. Your judgement was postponed until the morning; but that is now at hand.'
Faramir	`As for you, Frodo, in so far as lies in me under higher authority, I declare you free in the realm of, Gondor to the furthest of its ancient bounds; save only that neither you nor any that go with you have leave to come to this place unbidden. This doom shall stand for a year and a day, and then cease, unless you shall before that term come to Minas Tirith and present yourself to the Lord and Steward of the City. Then I will entreat him to confirm what I have done and to make it lifelong. In the meantime, whomsoever you take under your protection shall be under my protection and under the shield of Gondor. Are you answered? '
Frodo	`and I place myself at your service, if that is of any worth to one so high and honourable.'
Faramir	'And now, do you take this creature, this Sméagol, under your protection? '
Faramir	'you are under doom of death; but while you walk with Frodo you are safe for our part. Yet if ever you be found by any man of Gondor astray without him, the doom shall fall. And may death find you swiftly, within Gondor or without, if you do not well serve him. Now answer me: whither would you go? You were his guide, he says. Whither were you leading him? '
Faramir	`Answer me, or I will reverse my judgement! '
Frodo	`He brought me to the Black Gate, as I asked; but it was impassable.'
Frodo	'for he said that there is, or there may be, a path near to Minas Ithil.'
Frodo	`but the path climbs, I think, up into the mountains on the northern side of that vale where the old city stands. It goes up to a high cleft and so down to - that which is beyond.'
Cirith Ungol	`Is not that its name? '
Faramir	`Take this creature away, Anborn. Treat him gently, but watch him. And do not you, Sméagol, try to dive into the falls. The rocks have such teeth there as would slay you before your time. Leave us now and take your fish! '
Faramir	`I do not think you should go with this creature. It is wicked.'
Faramir	'but malice eats it like a canker, and the evil is growing. He will lead you to no good. If you will part with him, I will give him safe-conduct and guidance to any point on the borders of Gondor that he may name.'
Frodo	'He would follow after me as he long has done. And I have promised many times to take him under my protection and to go where he led. You would not ask me to break faith with him?'
Faramir	`But my heart would. For it seems less evil to counsel another man to break troth than to do so oneself, especially if one sees a friend bound unwitting to his own harm. But no - if he will go with you, you must now endure him. But I do not think you are holden to go to Cirith Ungol, of which he has told you less than he knows. That much I perceived clearly in his mind. Do not go to Cirith Ungol!'
Frodo	`Back to the Black Gate and deliver myself up to the guard? What do you know against this place that makes its name so dreadful? '
Frodo	'You cannot yourself, you say, guide me to the mountains, nor over them. But over the mountains I am bound, by solemn undertaking to the Council, to find a way or perish in the seeking. And if I turn back, refusing the road in its bitter end, where then shall I go among Elves or Men? Would you have me come to Gondor with this Thing, the Thing that drove your brother mad with desire? What spell would it work in Minas Tirith? Shall there be two cities of Minas Morgul, grinning at each other across a dead land filled with rottenness? '
Faramir	'But at the least, remember my warning: beware of this guide, Sméagol. He has done murder before now. I read it in him.'
Faramir	`You have little provision, but some small store of food fit for travellers I have ordered to be stowed in your packs. You will have no lack of water as you walk in Ithilien, but do not drink of any stream that flows from Imlad Morgul, the Valley of Living Death. This also I must tell you. My scouts and watchers have all returned, even some that have crept within sight of the Morannon. They all find a strange thing. The land is empty. Nothing is on the road, and no sound of foot, or horn, or bowstring is anywhere to be heard. A waiting silence broods above the Nameless Land. I do not know what this portends. But the time draws swiftly to some great conclusion. Storm is coming. Hasten while you may! If you are ready, let us go. The Sun will soon rise above the shadow.'
Faramir	`but take these staves. They may be of service to those who walk or climb in the wild. The men of the White Mountains use them; though these have been cut down to your height and newly shod. They are made of the fair tree lebethron, beloved of the woodwrights of Gondor, and a virtue has been set upon them of finding and returning. May that virtue not wholly fail under the Shadow into which you go!'
Frodo	'it was said to me by Elrond Halfelven that I should find friendship upon the way, secret and unlooked for. Certainly I looked for no such friendship as you have shown. To have found it turns evil to great good.'
Faramir	'but you and your servant Samwise I release from this, if you wish.'
Frodo	'Blindfold us all three, and cover up my eyes first, and then perhaps he will see that no harm is meant.'
Faramir	'If you take my counsel, you will not turn eastward yet. Go straight on, for thus you will have the cover of the woodland for many miles. On your west is an edge where the land falls into the great vales, sometimes suddenly and sheer, sometimes in long hillsides. Keep near to this edge and the skirts of the forest. In the beginning of your journey you may walk under daylight, I think. The land dreams in a false peace, and for a while all evil is withdrawn. Fare you well, while you may!'
Frodo	`Well, now for it again!'
Sméagol	's go! '
Frodo	`But if you can only speak ill of those who showed you mercy, keep silent! '
Sméagol	's little trickses. Oh yes, nice Master, nice Sméagol! '
Moon	't use this road. Oh no! Cruel peoples come this way, down from the Tower.'
Sam	'll still be hours of dark then time enough for you to take us a long march, if you know the way.'
Sam	'll go if we must.'
Frodo	`Is that the opening of-of the Morgul Valley, away over there beyond that black mass?'
Sam	're not going to move any more today, if day it is?'
Frodo	's the time? Seems to be getting late!'
Frodo	've only slept for about three hours.'
Sam	's that? Thunder, or drums, or what is it? '
Frodo	's been going on for a good while now. Sometimes the ground seems to tremble, sometimes it seems to be the heavy air throbbing in your ears.'
Sam	't he come back yet?'
Frodo	's not been a sign or sound of him.'
Sam	's ever going to be any use, which I doubt.'
Frodo	`I hope nothing has happened to him.'
Frodo	'm afraid our journey is drawing to an end.'
Sam	's hope, as my Gaffer used to say; and need of vittles, as he mostways used to add. You have a bite, Mr. Frodo, and then a bit of sleep.'
Sam	't be tea-time even, leastways not in decent places where there is tea-time.'
Frodo	`Look! The king has got a crown again!'
Frodo	't stand here. Make haste!'
Frodo	'Come back! Not that way. Gollum says not, and for once I agree with him.'
Frodo	's heavy on me, Sam lad, very heavy. I wonder how far I can carry it? Anyway I must rest before we venture on to that.'
Frodo	't stay here.'
Frodo	`I will try.'
Frodo	's staring eyes followed him, unable to wink or to withdraw. Surely there was the Lord of the Nine Riders returned to earth to lead his ghastly host to battle? Here, yes here indeed was the haggard king whose cold hand had smitten down the Ring-bearer with his deadly knife. The old wound throbbed with pain and a great chill spread towards Frodo'
Faramir	`This great array of spears and swords is going to Osgiliath. Will Faramir get across in time? He guessed it, but did he know the hour? And who can now hold the fords when the King of the Nine Riders comes? And other armies will come. I am too late. All is lost. I tarried on the way. All is lost. Even if my errand is performed, no one will ever know. There will be no one I can tell. It will be in vain.'
Frodo	're gone,'
Frodo	's something still alive in that place, something with eyes, or a seeing mind, if you take me; and the longer we stay in one spot, the sooner it will get on to us. Come on, Mr. Frodo! '
Sam	'Longer, did you say? '
Sam	't there a tunnel or something to go through? '
Frodo	`This is no place to sit in.'
Sam	'As you knew all along, I suppose? '
Frodo	've kept going for hours and hours.'
Frodo	'Let us find some corner out of the wind, and gather our strength-for the last lap.'
Sam	't they? '
Frodo	'But do not let us speak of that. Such drink is not for us.'
Sam	't any water up here: not a sound or a trickle have I heard. And anyway Faramir said we were not to drink any water in Morgul.'
Imlad Morgul	`We are not in that valley now, and if we came on a spring it would be flowing into it and not out of it.'
Sam	't like it.'
Frodo	`step or stone, breath or bone. Earth, air and water all seem accursed. But so our path is laid.'
Frodo	've fallen into? '
Frodo	't want them to.'
Silmaril	't the great tales never end? '
Frodo	's ended. Our part will end later - or sooner.'
Frodo	"'
Sauron	" '
Frodo	't make fun. I was serious. '
Frodo	" '
Sam	't be one to say that. Things done and over and made into part of the great tales are different. Why, even Gollum might be good in a tale, better than he is to have by you, anyway. And he used to like tales himself once, by his own account. I wonder if he thinks he'
Sam	't even a bit of moss! '
Frodo	's false.'
Sam	's gone to fetch them, Orcs or whatever they are?'
Frodo	's anything, it will be some little private trick of his own-that he thinks is quite secret.'
Frodo	's the one idea in all his little schemes, if he has any. But how bringing us up here will help him in that is more than I can guess.'
Frodo	's just biding his time and waiting on chance.'
Stinker	't let us really take the precious thing over the border without making some kind of trouble.'
Stinker	'd keep watch over you; and anyway, if you lay near, with my arm round you, no one could come pawing you without your Sam knowing it.'
Frodo	'Yes, even here I could sleep.'
Frodo	's brown hands, and the other lay softly upon his master'
Frodo	`pawing at master,'
Sam	'But where have you been to - sneaking off and sneaking back, you old villain? '
Frodo	's how it is. Sorry. But where have you been to? '
Sam	's the time? Is it today or tomorrow? '
Sméagol	't sneaking about to watch.'
Sam	' Gently he smoothed the hair back from Frodo'
Frodo	's dark still! '
Frodo	's tomorrow. So we must be walking on. The last lap.'
Frodo	'Hullo, Sméagol! Found any food? Have you had any rest? '
Sméagol	's a sneak.'
Frodo	's unwise whether they are true or false.'
Sméagol	'He was given that name by kind Master Samwise, the hobbit that knows so much.'
Frodo	't be.'
Frodo	're free: free to go back to food and rest, wherever you wish to go, except to servants of the Enemy. And one day I may reward you, I or those that remember me.'
Sam	't mind bad smells.'
Sméagol	's the only way.'
Sam	'll warrant, with a hundred years of their filth in it.'
Frodo	's the only way, we must take it.'
Frodo	'It all comes from here, the stench and the peril. Now for it! Quick! '
Sam	't he wait? '
Frodo	'Sméagol! '
Sam	'll be sorry for it.'
Frodo	'Right or wrong, we must take the other.'
Sam	's something worse than Gollum about. I can feel something looking at us.'
Sam	'I wish old Tom was near us now!'
Sam	's gift! The star-glass! A light to you in dark places, she said it was to be. The star-glass!'
Frodo	`Why yes! Why had I forgotten it? A light when all other lights go out! And now indeed light alone can help us.'
Galadriel	' he called, and gathering his courage he lifted up the Phial once more. The eyes halted. For a moment their regard relaxed, as if some hint of doubt troubled them. Then Frodo'
Sam	's get out of this foul hole!'
Sam	'em! '
Frodo	`But I still feel that they are looking at me, or thinking about me: making some other plan, perhaps. If this light were lowered, or if it failed, they would quickly come again.'
Sam	`Gnats in a net. May the curse of Faramir bite that Gollum and bite him quick! '
Frodo	`Come! Let us see what Sting can do. It is an elven-blade. There were webs of horror in the dark ravines of Beleriand where it was forged. But you must be the guard and hold back the eyes. Here, take the star-glass. Do not be afraid. Hold it up and watch!'
Frodo	`On! On! '
Sam	'll be through-through before any one can stop us! '
Sméagol	'll pay everyone back! '
Sam	'm'
Shelob	' He spat on Sam'
Faramir	's other hand was tightening on Sam'
Sam	's throat loosened; but his fingers still gripped the sword-hand. Sam tore himself forward and away, and stood up, and then quickly he wheeled away to his right, pivoted on the wrist held by Gollum. Laying hold of the staff with his left hand, Sam swung it up, and down it came with a whistling crack on Gollum'
Frodo	's name. He was too late. So far Gollum'
Shelob	's head. Poison frothed and bubbled from the wound. Now splaying her legs she drove her huge bulk down on him again. Too soon. For Sam still stood upon his feet, and dropping his own sword, with both hands he held the elven-blade point upwards, fending off that ghastly roof; and so Shelob, with the driving force of her own cruel will, with strength greater than any warrior'
Frodo	's head, his senses reeling in the foul stench, his two hands still gripping the hilt of the sword. Through the mist before his eyes he was aware dimly of Frodo'
Frodo	's breast and to his mouth, but no stir of life could he find, nor feel the faintest flutter of the heart. Often he chafed his master'
Frodo	't follow! Wake up, Mr. Frodo! O wake up, Frodo, me dear, me dear. Wake up!'
Frodo	'Not asleep, dead! '
Frodo	've got to do? And leave him?'
Frodo	've got to go on.'
Frodo	's hand and could not release it. And time went by and still he knelt, holding his master'
Gandalf	's not for me to go taking the Ring, putting myself forward.'
Frodo	't choose themselves.'
Lorien	'Then take It, it is! '
Sam	'll not leave you again. Rest you quiet till I come; and may no foul creature come anigh you! And if the Lady could hear me and give me one wish, I would wish to come back and find you again. Good-bye! '
Frodo	't be their Ring-bearer. Not without Mr. Frodo.'
Sam	'll be too late again.'
Shagrat	't want Shelob on us.'
Shelob	've struck a bit of luck at last: got something that Lugbúrz wants.'
Lugbúrz	's the danger in a thing like that? '
Shagrat	're troubled about something. The Nazgûl down below are, by your account; and Lugbúrz is too. Something nearly slipped.'
Shagrat	's a place there where we can talk a bit, while the lads go on.'
Sam	's body for some foul purpose and he could not follow. He thrust and pushed at the block, and he threw himself against it, but it did not yield. Then not far inside, or so he thought, he heard the two captains'
Gorbag	's no game serving down in the city.'
Gorbag	's good loot nice and handy, and no big bosses.'
Shagrat	`Like old times.'
Gorbag	're done too. But see here: when were you ordered out? '
Gorbag	'm told.'
Shagrat	`Big things going on away west, they say.'
Gorbag	't you, special orders or no? What are you for?'
Shelob	's on the hunt.'
Lugbúrz	'd have to go and get him. Nice for you. But there was more than one.'
Shagrat	't you see that? And who stuck a pin into Her Ladyship? Same one, I reckon. And where is he? Where is he, Shagrat? '
Shelob	's someone loose hereabouts as is more dangerous than any other damned rebel that ever walked since the bad old times, since the Great Siege. Something has slipped.'
Shagrat	've never spotted him. Very funny indeed! '
Shagrat	'll begin to worry about something else.'
Gorbag	't seem to have thought him worth much anyhow - just left him lying: regular elvish trick.'
Shagrat	'm going to do.'
Gorbag	'What, teeth, nails, hair, and all? '
Lugbúrz	's wanted safe and whole.'
Gorbag	't guess. He might as well go in the pot.'
Carrion	't dead! '
Sam	't trust your head, Samwise, it is not the best part of you. The trouble with you is that you never really had any hope. Now what is to be done? '
Shagrat	's happened to him.'
Gorbag	's go!'
Shagrat	're all as good as dead.'
Lugbúrz	've caught the kitten and let the cat escape.'
Sam	've got to get back to him. Somehow, somehow! '
Shagrat	'Put him right up in the top chamber.'
Gorbag	't you any lock-ups down below? '
Shagrat	'll be safe there.'
Sam	's loose!'
